Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 1
1
BASIC CONCEPTS OF COMPUTER
1.1 INTRODUCTION
A computer is a programmable machine designed to perform
arithmetic and logical operations automatically and
sequentially on the input given by the user and gives the
desired output after processing. Computer components are
divided into two major categories namely hardware and
software. Hardware is the machine itself and its connected
devices such as monitor, keyboard, mouse etc. Software are
the set of programs that make use of hardware for performing
various functions.
1.2 OBJECTIVES
After going through this lesson you would be able to:

familiarise yourself with characteristics of computers

identify the basic components of a computer

explain the importance of various units of a computer

differentiate between system software and application
software

explain the importance of operating system

get acquainted with open source

appreciate the need of computer security
1.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF COMPUTERS
The characteristics of computers that have made them so
powerful and universally useful are speed, accuracy,
diligence, versatility and storage capacity. Let us discuss them
briefly.
2 :: Computer and Office Applications
Speed
Computers work at an incredible speed. A powerful computer
is capable of performing about 3-4 million simple instructions
per second.
Accuracy
In addition to being fast, computers are also accurate. Errors
that may occur can almost always be attributed to human
error (inaccurate data, poorly designed system or faulty
instructions/programs written by the programmer)
Diligence
Unlike human beings, computers are highly consistent. They
do not suffer from human traits of boredom and tiredness
resulting in lack of concentration. Computers, therefore, are
better than human beings in performing voluminous and
repetitive jobs.
Versatility
Computers are versatile machines and are capable of
performing any task as long as it can be broken down into a
series of logical steps. The presence of computers can be
seen in almost every sphere Œ Railway/Air reservation, Banks,
Hotels, Weather forecasting and many more.
Storage Capacity
Today™s computers can store large volumes of data. A piece
of information once recorded (or stored) in the computer,
can never be forgotten and can be retrieved almost
instantaneously.
1.4 COMPUTER ORGANIZATION
Fig.1.1: Computer System
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 3
A computer system (fig.1.1) consists of mainly four basic
units; namely input unit, storage unit, central processing
unit and output unit. Central Processing unit further includes
Arithmetic logic unit and control unit, as shown in
Figure 1.2.
A computer performs five major operations or functions
irrespective of its size and make. These are

it accepts data or instructions as input,

it stores data and instruction

it processes data as per the instructions,

it controls all operations inside a computer, and

it gives results in the form of output.
1.4.1  Functional Units:
a.
Input Unit: 
This unit is used for entering data and
programs  into the computer system by the user for
processing.
Fig. 1.2: Basic computer Organization
b.
Storage Unit: 
The storage unit is used for storing data
and instructions before and after processing.
Œ Œ Œ Œ
Dotted lines (Œ Œ Œ Œ) indicate
flow of instruction solid lines
(ŒŒŒŒŒ) indicate flow of data
4 :: Computer and Office Applications
c.
Output Unit: 
The output unit is used for
 
storing the
result as output produced by the computer after
processing.
d.
Proces
sing: 
The task of performing operations like
arithmetic and logical operations is called processing.
The Central Processing Unit (CPU) takes data and
instructions from the storage unit and makes all sorts of
calculations based on the instructions given and the type
of data provided. It is then sent back to the storage unit.
CPU includes Arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and control unit
(CU)

Arithmetic Logic Unit: 
All calculations and
comparisons, based on the instructions provided, are
carried out within the ALU. It performs arithmetic
functions like addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division and also logical operations like greater than,
less than and equal to etc.

Control Unit: 
Controlling of all operations like input,
processing and output are performed by control unit.
It takes care of step by step processing of all operations
inside the computer.
1.4.2 Memory
Computer™s memory can be classified into two types; primary
memory and secondary memory
a.
Primary Memory can be further classified as RAM and
ROM.

RAM
 or Random Access Memory is the unit in a
computer system. It is the place in a computer where
the operating system, application programs and the
data in current use are kept temporarily so that they
can be accessed by the computer™s processor. It is
said to be ‚volatile™ since its contents are accessible
only as long as the computer is on. The contents of
RAM are no more available 
once the computer is
turned off.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 5
ROM
 
or Read Only Memory is a special type of memory
which can only be read and contents of which are not
lost even when the computer is switched off. It typically
contains manufacturer™s instructions. Among other
things, ROM also stores an initial program called the
‚bootstrap loader™ whose function is to start the
operation of computer system once the power is turned
on.
b.   Secondary Memory
RAM is volatile memory having a limited storage capacity.
Secondary/auxiliary memory is storage other than the
RAM. These include devices that are peripheral and are
connected and controlled by the computer to enable
permanent storage of programs and data.
Secondary storage devices are of two types; magnetic and
optical. Magnetic devices include hard disks and optical
storage devices are CDs, DVDs, Pen drive, Zip drive etc.

Hard Disk
Fig. 1.3: Hard Disk
Hard disks are made up of rigid material and are usually
a stack of metal disks sealed in a box. The hard disk and
the hard disk drive exist together as a unit and is a
permanent part of the computer where data and programs
are saved. These disks have storage capacities ranging
from 1GB to 80 GB and more. Hard disks are rewritable.
6 :: Computer and Office Applications

Compact Disk
Compact Disk (CD) is portable disk having data storage
capacity between 650-700 MB. It can hold large amount
of information such as music, full-motion videos, and
text etc. CDs can be either read only or read write type.

Digital Video Disk
Digital Video Disk (DVD) is similar to a CD but has larger
storage capacity and enormous clarity. Depending upon
the disk type it can store several Gigabytes of data. DVDs
are primarily used to store music or movies and can be
played back on your television or the computer too. These
are not rewritable.
1.4.3 Input / Output Devices:
These devices
 
are used to enter information and instructions
into a computer for storage or processing and to deliver the
processed data to a user. Input/Output devices are required
for users to communicate with the computer. In simple terms,
input devices bring information INTO the computer and
output devices bring information OUT of a computer system.
These input/output devices are also known as peripherals
since they surround the CPU and memory of a computer
system.
a)
Input Devices
An input device is any device that provides input to a
computer. There are many input devices, but the two
most common ones are a keyboard and mouse. Every
key you press on the keyboard and every movement or
click you make with the mouse sends a specific input
signal to the computer.

Keyboard:
 The keyboard is very much like a standard
typewriter keyboard with a few additional keys. The basic
QWERTY layout of characters is maintained to make it
easy to use the system. The additional keys are included
to perform certain special functions. These are known
as function keys that vary in number from keyboard to
keyboard.  (see fig. 1.4)
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 7
Fig. 1.4: Keyboard

Mouse:
 A device that controls the movement of the cursor
or pointer on a display screen. A mouse is a small object
you can roll along a hard and flat surface (Fig. 1.5). Its
name is derived from its shape, which looks a bit like a
mouse. As you move the mouse, the pointer on the display
screen moves in the same direction.
Fig. 1.5: Mouse

Trackball:
 A trackball is an input device used to enter
motion data into computers or other electronic devices.
It serves the same purpose as a mouse, but is designed
with a moveable ball on the top, which can be rolled in
any direction.

Touchpad:
 A touch pad is a device for pointing (controlling
input positioning) on a computer display screen. It is an
alternative to the mouse. Originally incorporated in laptop
computers, touch pads are also being made for use with
desktop computers. A touch pad works by sensing the
user™s finger movement and downward pressure.

Touch Screen:
 It allows the user to operate/make
selections by simply touching the display screen. A display
 
Function Keys
 
Numeric Keypad
 
Cursor Movement 
Keys
 
Alphanumeric Keypad/ 
 
Special
-
function Keys
 
8 :: Computer and Office Applications
screen that is sensitive to the touch of a finger or stylus.
Widely used on ATM machines, retail point-of-sale
terminals, car navigation systems, medical monitors and
industrial control panels.

Light Pen: 
Light pen is an input device that utilizes a
light-sensitive detector to select objects on a display
screen. (Fig. 1.6)
Fig. 1.6 Light Pen

Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR): 
MICR can
identify character printed with a special ink that contains
particles of magnetic material. This device particularly
finds applications in banking industry.

Optical mark recognition (OMR):
 Optical mark
recognition, also called mark sense reader is a technology
where an OMR device senses the presence or absence of
a mark, such as pencil mark. OMR is widely used in
tests such as aptitude test.

Bar code reader:
  Bar-code readers are photoelectric
scanners that read the bar codes or vertical zebra strips
marks, printed on product containers. These devices are
generally used in super markets, bookshops etc.

Scanner:
 Scanner is an input device that can read text
or illustration printed on paper and translates the
information into a form that the computer can use. A
scanner works by digitizing an image.  (Fig. 1.7)
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 9
Fig. 1.7 Scanner
b.
Output Devices:
Output device receives information from the CPU and
presents it to the user in the desired from. The processed
data, stored in the memory of the computer is sent to the
output unit, which then converts it into a form that can
be understood by the user. The output is usually
produced in one of the two ways Œ on the display device,
or on paper (hard copy).

Monitor: 
is often used synonymously with ﬁcomputer
screenﬂ or ﬁdisplay.ﬂ Monitor is an output device that
resembles the television screen (fig. 1.8). It may use a
Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) to display information. The
monitor is associated with a keyboard for manual input
of characters and displays the information as it is keyed
in. It also displays the program or application output.
Like the television, monitors are also available in different
sizes.
Fig. 1.8: Monitor
10 :: Computer and Office Applications

Printer: 
Printers are used to produce paper (commonly
known as hardcopy) output. Based on the technology
used, they can be classified as Impact or Non-impact
printers.
Impact printers
 use the typewriting printing mechanism
wherein a hammer strikes the paper through a ribbon in
order to produce output. Dot-matrix and Character
printers fall under this category.
Non-impact
 printers do not touch the paper while
printing. They use chemical, heat or electrical signals to
etch the symbols on paper. Inkjet, Deskjet, Laser, Thermal
printers fall under this category of printers.

Plotter: 
Plotters are used to print graphical output on
paper. It interprets computer commands and makes line
drawings on paper using multicoloured automated pens.
It is capable of producing graphs, drawings, charts, maps
etc. (Fig. 1.9)
 
 
Fig. 1.9 Plotter

Facsimile (
FAX): 
Facsimile machine,
 a device that can
send or receive pictures and text over a telephone line.
Fax machines work by digitizing an image.

Sound cards and Speaker(s): 
An expansion board that
enables a computer to manipulate and output sounds.
Sound cards are necessary for nearly all CD-ROMs and
have become commonplace on modern personal
computers. Sound cards enable the computer to output
sound through speakers connected to the board, to record
sound input from a microphone connected to the
computer, and manipulate sound s
tored on a disk.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 11
1.5 COMPUTER SOFTWARE
Computer software is the set of programs that makes the
hardware perform a set of tasks in particular order. Hardware
and software are complimentary to each other. Both have to
work together to produce meaningful results. Computer
software is classified into two broad categories; system
software and application software.
1.5.1 System Software:
System software consists of a group of programs that control
the operations of a computer equipment including functions
like managing memory, managing peripherals, loading,
storing, and is an interface between the application programs
and the computer. MS DOS (Microsoft™s Disk Operating
System), UNIX are examples of system software.
1.5.2 Application software:
Software that can perform a specific task for the user, such
as word processing, accounting, budgeting or payroll, fall
under the category of application software. Word processors,
spreadsheets, database management systems are all
examples of general purpose application software.
Types of application software are:

Word processing software:
 The main purpose of this
software is to produce documents. MS-Word, Word Pad,
Notepad and some other text editors are some of the
examples of word processing software.

Database software:
 Database is a collection of related
data. The purpose of this software is to organize and
manage data. The advantage of this software is that you
can change the way data is stored and displayed. MS
access, dBase, FoxPro, Paradox, and Oracle are some of
the examples of database software.

Spread sheet software:
 The spread sheet software is used
to maintain budget, financial statements, grade sheets,
and sales records. The purpose of this software is
organizing numbers. It also allows the users to perform
12 :: Computer and Office Applications
simple or complex calculations on the numbers entered
in rows and columns. MS-Excel is one of the example of
spreadsheet software.

Presentation software:
 This software is used to display
the information in the form of slide show. The three main
functions of presentation software is editing that allows
insertion and formatting of text, including graphics in
the text and executing the slide shows. The best example
for this type of application software is Microsoft
PowerPoint.

Multimedia software:
 Media players and real players are
the examples of multimedia software. This software will
allow the user to create audio and videos. The different
forms of multimedia software are audio converters,
players, burners, video encoders and decoders.
1.6 COMPUTER LANGUAGE
Computer language or programming language is a coded
syntax used by computer programmers to communicate with
a computer. Computer language establishes a flow of
communication between software programs. The language
enables a computer user to dictate what commands the
computer must perform to process data. These languages
can be classified into following categories (Fig. 1.10).
1.
Machine language
2.
Assembly language
3.
High level language
Fig. 1.10: Computer Languages
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 13
1.6.1  Machine Language
Machine language or machine code is the native language
directly understood by the computer™s central processing unit
or CPU. This type of computer language is not easy to
understand, as it only uses a binary system, an element of
notations containing only a series of numbers consisting of
one and zero, to produce commands.
1.6.2  Assembly Level Language
Assembly Level Language is a set of codes that can run
directly on the computer™s processor. This type of language
is most appropriate in writing operating systems and
maintaining desktop applications. With the assembly level
language, it is easier for a programmer to define commands.
It is easier to understand and use as compared to machine
language.
1.6.3 High Level Language
High Level Languages are user-friendly languages which are
similar to English with vocabulary of words and symbols.
These are easier to learn and require less time to write.
They are problem oriented rather than ‚machine™ based.
Program written in a high-level language can be translated
into many machine languages and therefore can run on any
computer for which there exists an appropriate translator.
1.6.4 Compiler & Interpreter
These are the programs that execute instructions written in
a high-level language. There are two ways to run programs
written in a high-level language. The most common is to
compile the program; the other method is to pass the program
through an interpreter.
a.
Compiler
A compiler is a special program that processes statements
written in a particular programming language called as
source code and converts them into machine language
or ﬁmachine codeﬂ that a computer™s processor uses.
14 :: Computer and Office Applications
Compiler translates high level language programs directly
into machine language program. This process is called
compilation. (Fig 1.11)
Fig. 1.11: Compilation
b.
Interpreter
An interpreter translates high-level instructions into an
intermediate form, which it then executes. Compiled
programs generally run faster than interpreted programs.
The advantage of an interpreter, however, is that it does
not need to go through the compilation stage during which
machine instructions are generated. This process can be
time-consuming if the program is long. (Fig 1.12)
Fig. 1.12: Interpretation
1.6.5 Open source software:
Open source refers to a program or software in which the
source code (the form of the program when a programmer
writes a program in a particular programming language) is
available to the general public for use and/or modification
from its original design free of charge.
Open source code is typically created as a collaborative effort
in which programmers improve upon the code and share the
changes within the community.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 15
The rationale for this movement is that a larger group of
programmers not concerned with proprietary ownership or
financial gain will produce a more useful and bug-free product
for everyone to use.
The basics behind the Open Source Initiative is that when
programmers can read, redistribute and modify the source

sprouted in the technological community as a response to
proprietary software owned by corporations.
Proprietary software is privately owned and controlled. In
the computer industry, proprietary is considered the opposite
of open. A proprietary design or technique is one that is owned
by a company. It also implies that the company has not
divulged specifications that would allow other companies to
duplicate the product.
1.7 OPERATING SYSTEM
An operating system is a software component of a computer
system that is responsible for the management of various
activities of the computer and the sharing of computer
resources. It hosts several applications that run on a
computer and handles the operations of computer hardware.
Users and application programs access the services offered
by the operating systems, by means of system calls and
application programming interfaces. Users interact with a
computer operating system through Command Line
Interfaces (CLIs) or Graphical User Interfaces known as GUIs.
In short, an operating system enables user interaction with
computer systems by acting as an interface between users
or application programs and the computer hardware. Some
of the common operating systems are LINUX, Windows,etc.
1.8 WINDOWS XP DESKT
OP ELEMENTS
Start Menu
When clicked on the start button, start menu appears on
the screen giving all the available options to start using the
16 :: Computer and Office Applications
Windows (See Fig. 1.13). Desktop icons provide access to
commonly used programs, folders and files.
Fig. 1.13
Overview of the options available in the start menu.
Task
Description
All Programs
Displays a list of installed program,
which a user can start or use
My Documents
Displays a list of documents used by
the current user
My Recent Documents
Displays a list of recently used
documents by the current user
My Picture
Displays a list of pictures/photos used
by the current user
My Music
Displays a list of music/songs used by
the current user
Control Panel
Displays a list of utilities to configure
the computer system and install
software and hardware
Printers and Faxes
Displays a list of currently installed
printers and faxes in the current
computer system
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 17
Help and Support
Start the XP help and support program
to find how to do a task in windows
Search
Helps the user to find any file or folder
from a list of document used by the
current user.
Run
Starts an application program or
executes a DOS command
Log Off
Log off the currently logged in user of
the system
Turn Off Computer
Close currently opened program, log
off the current user and switch off the
computer system.
Task Bar
When you start the computer system, then start button and
task bar appears on the bottom of the screen and by default
remains visible when Windows is running (See Fig. 1.14).
Whenever a program is run or a window is opened, an icon
representing the program appears on the taskbar. To switch
between windows or program, click on the icon representing
the window on the task bar. When the program or window
is closed, the icon disappears from the task bar.
Task bar
System Tray
Fig. 1.14
The system tray is part of the task bar and displays the
current time as well as the status icons.
1.8.1 Start a Program
To start a program, do the following;
1.
Click on the 
Start
 Button.
2.
Click on the 
All Programs,
 you will see a list of all
the program icons and program folders.
3.
Point to the desired folder say 
Accessories
 and select
the desired program to run such as 
Paint.
18 :: Computer and Office Applications
1.8.2 Quit a Program
To quit a program, select the close button 
(×) 
in the upper-
right corner of the window  OR
Click on 
File
 menu and select 
Close
 option.
1.8.3 Getting Help
Online help and support provided is of great help in using
and learning windows. One can get help on a specific topic
or on current task which is being executed. To start help

click on the 
Start 
button

click on 
Help and support
 option
A list of help and support topics and online tutorial is
displayed on the screen (see Fig. 1.15). One can use the tabs
in the screen to search for the desired information in several
ways.
Fig. 1.15

Click on a topic or task to know more about how to get
the job done or type in a search word to locate the help
on a specific topic.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 19

Click on the 
Index
 tab to locate specific topic listed
alphabetically and the follow the instructions displayed
on the screen.

Click on 
Favourites
 tab to add Help Topics, search
results to your Favourites list to make them easy to
locate in the future

Click on 
History
 to pick from a list of Help and Support
pages that you have read in the past.

Click on 
Support
 to get various kind of online support
such as Microsoft online support, News Group on
Windows.

Click on 
Option
 to configure the help and support
center as per your requirement.
To close Help and Support windows, select the close button
(×) in the upper-right corner of the window.
1.8.4 Searching Files and Folders
If you don™t know where a document or folder is located,
you can use the Search option to locate it in the local storage
such as Hard Disk, CD or in the network drive (if the system
is part of a network). The Indexing Service provided by the
Search maintains an index of all the files on your computer,
making searches faster.
To search for a file or folder
1.
Click 
Start
, and click on 
Search
.
2.
Select 
All files and folders 
from the left hand side
of the windows (see Fig. 1.16).
3.
Type the name of the file or folder in part or full, or
type a word or phrase that exists in the file to be
searched.
4.
If you do not know either piece of information select
one or more of the remaining options:

In 
Look in
, click the drive, folder, or network
you want to search.
20 :: Computer and Office Applications
Fig. 1.16

Click on 
When was it modified?
 to look for files
that were created or modified on or between
specific dates.

To look for files of a specific size, click on 
What
size is it? 
Select a size.

Click on 
More advanced options
 to specify
additional search criteria.
5.
Once you finish specifying the search criteria, click on
Search to
 
locate the file.
Similarly you can search for specific information on
Internet, or people in your address book, search for
a printer or a computer on your network.
1.8.5 Changing System settings
By using Control Panel™s tools you can customize the way
Windows look and work! Also you can install new hardware,
add and remove (install/uninstall) software programs, change
the look and feel of your desktop and much more. It also
includes a number of administrative tools in Administrative
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 21
Tools option for better administration of Windows in terms
of User Management, Event viewer, Component Service etc.
To start Control Panel and use the available tool, do the
following;

Click on 
Start

Click on 
Control Panel

Select the desired tool to use
For example to create a new or modify the settings for an
existing user click on ‚User Account™ icon in the control
panel.
1.8.6 Using 'My Computer'for browsing your disk
drives
Your disk drives hold all the information on your computer:
all the files, folders, programs as well as the documents.
My Computer displays the contents of floppy, hard disk,
CD-ROM, and network drives. One can also search for and
open files and folders, and use options in Control Panel to
modify computer™s settings.

To use My Computer, click on 
Start
, and then click
on 
My Computer
 or double click the 
My computer
icon on the desktop. My computer windows opens
to show all the drives present on your computer. (see
Fig. 1.17).
Fig. 1.17
22 :: Computer and Office Applications
Display the storage Contents

To see what™s on your hard disk, under 
Hard Disk
Drives
, double-click the drive you want to see such
as C:, D: etc.

To find a file or folder on a CD-ROM, or other media,
under 
Devices with Removable Storage
, double-
click on the respective storage media you want to see.

To find a file in a folder, under 
Files Stored on This
Computer
, double-click a folder.
1.9 FILE MANAGEMENT IN WINDOWS
File management in windows can be done through Windows
Explorer or My Computer. Windows Explorer displays the
hierarchical list of files, folders, and storage drives (both fixed
and removable) on your computer. It also lists any network
drives that have been mapped to as a drive letters on your
computer. Windows Explorer can be used to copy, move,
rename, and search for files and folders. For example, to copy
a file, you can open a folder that contains the desired file to
be copied or moved, and then just drag and drop the file to
target folder or drive. (see fig. 1.18)
Fig. 1.18
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 23
When files or folders are deleted from hard disk, Windows
places them in the Recycle Bin, from where they can be
retrieved, until the Recycle Bin is made empty. Files or folders
deleted from a removable storage media such as network drive
are permanently deleted and are not sent to the Recycle Bin.
1.9.1 Using Windows Explorer
Windows offer another utility "Windows Explorer" which helps
you in working with files and folders on your computer.
To open Windows Explorer,

Click on 
Start
,

Point to 
All Programs
,

Point to 
Accessories
, and then click on 
Windows
Explorer 
(see Fig. 1.19)
Fig. 1.19
The left pane of the Explorer window shows a hierarchy of all
the drives, folders and desktop items on your computer. A
drive or folder that contains other folders has a plus sign to
the left of the icon. Click the plus sign to expand it and see
the folders inside. (see Fig. 1.20)
24 :: Computer and Office Applications
1.9.2 Opening drives and folders
Two drives nearly all computers have are a floppy drive (drive
A:) and a hard drive (drive C:). If you have more than one drive,
then they are named D:, E: and so on. If you have a CD drive
or a DVD drive, it also is named with a letter. Opening a hard
drive is easy. Just double click the icon representing the drive
you want to open. Files and folders contained in the drive are
now shown in the opened window. Now for opening a folder,
double click its icon.
Fig. 1.20
1.9.3
Copying or Moving a file or Folder using
My Document

Click on 
Start
, and then click on 
My Documents
.

Click the file or folder to be copied. More than one file
or folder can be copied at a time.

To select more than one consecutive files or folders,
click the first file or folder, press and hold down SHIFT
key, and then click the last files or folders.

To select non-consecutive files or folders, press and
hold down CTRL key, and then click each of the files
or folders to be copied.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 25

Under 
Edit menu,
 select 
Copy.

Select the target drive or folder to which you want to
copy the files

Under 
Edit menu
, select 
Paste 
to copy the desired file
or folder to the target drive.
1.9.4 View file details
1.
Click on 
Start
, and then click on 
My Documents.
2.
Double-click the folder that contains the files to be
viewed.
3.
On the 
View
 menu, click 
Details
 (see Fig. 1.21).
4.
It will display all the details about the files such as
Name, Type, size etc.
Fig. 1.21
1.9.5 Copying and moving files using Explorer

Click 
Start
, point to 
All Programs
, point to 
Accessories
,
and then click 
Windows Explorer
.

Make sure the destination for the file or folder you want
to move is visible (see Fig. 1.22).
26 :: Computer and Office Applications
Fig. 1.22

Drag the file or folder from the right pane and drop it
on to the destination folder in the left pane to move the
file or folder there.

If you drag an item while pressing the right mouse
button, you can move, copy, or create a shortcut to the
file in its new location.

To copy the item instead of moving it, press and hold
down CTRL while dragging.

If you drag an item to another disk, it is copied, not
moved. To move the item, press and hold down SHIFT
while dragging.

Dragging a program to a new location creates a shortcut
to that program. To move a program, right-click and
then drag the program to the new location.
1.9.6 Create a new folder
Folders help you to organize your files. You can create a folder
either by using My Computer window or through Windows
Explorer. You can create a Folder in any existing disk drive
or folder or on the windows desktop. The steps for creating
a folder are:
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 27
1.
Click on 
Start
, and then click on 
My Documents
2.
Under 
File
 menu click 
New 
and select
 Folder
. (see Fig.
1.23)
3.
A new folder is displayed with the default name, 
New
Folder
.
4.
Type a name for the new folder, and then press ENTER.
5.
A new folder can also be created directly on the desktop
by right-clicking a blank area on the desktop, pointing
to 
New
, and then clicking 
Folder
.
1.9.7 Rename a file or folder
1.
Click on 
Start
, and then click on 
My Documents
2.
Click on the file or folder you want to rename.
3.
Under 
File
 menu click on 
Rename 
(see Fig. 1.23).
4.
Type the new name, and then press ENTER key.
5.
Alternately file or folder can also be renamed by right-
clicking it and then clicking on 
Rename
.
1.9.8 Delete a file or folder
1.
Click on 
Start
, and then click on 
My Documents
2.
Click on the file or folder you want to delete.
3.
Under 
File
 menu click on 
Delete 
(see Fig. 1.23).
4.
Files or folders can also be deleted by right-clicking the
file or folder and then clicking 
Delete
.
5.
Deleted files or folders are stored in the 
Recycle Bin
,
till they are permanently removed from the Recycle Bin.
6.
To retrieve a deleted file, double-click the 
Recycle Bin
icon on the desktop. Right-click on the file to be
retrieved, and then click 
Restore
.
7.
To permanently delete a file, press and hold down SHIFT
key and drag it to the Recycle Bin.
28 :: Computer and Office Applications
Fig. 1.23
1.10 COMPUTER SECURITY
Security has always been an overriding concern of human
kind. For many organization, information plays a very important
role in running business. Therefore, it becomes necessary to
safeguard information from reaching the illegal hands. When
data takes the shapes of digital form, a different security
procedure is required. This branch of security is called
computer security.
Information technology has also some loopholes associated
with it, like the possibility of stealing of vital information and
intentionally implanting destructive or malicious programs on
the other's computer system. The motive behind such activities
is to show down the pace of an organization and harm it
economically. We shall discuss now about these malicious
programs which are often called virus, worms, Trojan horse,
logic bomb, spyware and so on.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 29
1.10.1 Virus
Virus is a program which has been written to interfere with
the normal functioning of the computer. It does this by
clogging the memory of the system by making copies of itself
or it may destory critical information used by other computer
prgrams.
There are three main types of viruses:  
Boot sector viruses
which infect the boot sector in the hard disk and affect the
partition table, 
File viruses
 attach with executable files. The
commonly infected files are those with COM or EXE extensions.
The third, 
System viruses
 infect specific system files such
as command.com. Computer viruses can be grouped into
Time Bomb, Trojan Horse, Worm etc. Time Bomb will start
on a particular date, at a particular time. The computer will
loose its ability to function properly.
The virus known as Trojan Horse will enter into a computer
through an e-mail or free programs that have been down
loaded from the internet and casue plenty of damage. Viruses
known as Worms are constructed to infiltrate on the legitimate
data processing programs and alter or destroy the data. Worm
programs often use network connections to spread from one
computer system to another system, thus, worms attach
system that are linked through communication lines.
1.10.2 Protecting computer system using antivirus
software
In case the virus is present, it becomes our duty to use some
anti-virus software for preventing virus attacks in future.
Anti-virus software falls into two categories: Scanners and
Integrity checkers.
A scanner is a program that will detect the virus by checking
the files on the disk, the boot sector of the disk and programs
in the memory by looking for the signature of the virus. The
signature is a piece of program code that is unique to the
virus. It is very necessary to update regularly the virus
scanner that you have bought. This is essential because new
viruses are constantly appearing.
30 :: Computer and Office Applications
Integrity checkers work using simple checksums or complicated
algorithms or cryptographic checksums which check if a file
has been modified. It may be boring for you to check for virus
every time you run the system. But you should not worry. Help
is at hand with HomeGuard a unique device which once fitted
to the computer automatically scans in the background for
viruses. If there are viruses found in the system, HomeGuard
will clean it up automatically without even having to press a
key.
1.10.3 Precautions to be taken against viruses

Install a memory-resident program in RAM that will detect
and warn if a virus is present.

Do not allow hardware engineers or sales persons to put
a write enabled floppy into your computer uless they can
guarantee that it is not infected.

Backup copies of all programs and data files should be
kept.

Backup copies of programs should be held as read-only
disks to prevent infection.

At least 2 copies of the backup must be kept.

Never boot your machine with a floppy from an unknown
source.

Always write-protect your disk when you use it in another
machine.
INTEXT QUESTION 1.1
1.
What are the characteristics of a computer?
2.
How many types of printers are commonly used?
3.
State TRUE or FALSE
(a)
All code or data is stored and processed in computers
using two symbols; 0 and 1.
(b)
Machine code is also known as source code.
Basic Concepts of Computer
 :: 31
1.11 WHA
T YOU HAVE LEARNT
In this lesson, you have learnt about computer organization,
its characteristics (speed, accuracy, diligence, versatility, and
storage capacity) that have contributed towards making it such
a popular device. The differences between concepts like
hardware/software, system/application software, ROM/RAM
was also explained. Various types of input, output and
secondary storage devices along with their usages, were also
studied.
1.12 TERMINAL QUESTIONS
1.
What are the basic units of a computer system?
2.
What is application software? Explain with the help of
examples.
3.
Write short notes on
a.
Operating system
b.
Compiler
c.
Assembly language
d.
Control unit
1.13 ANSWER TO INTEXT QUESTIONS
Intext Question 1.1
1.
Computer characteristics :

Speed

Accuracy
32 :: Computer and Office Applications

Diligence

Versatility

Storage capacity
2.
Two types or Impact & Non Impact Printer
3.
(a)
true
(b)
false
