1The first twochaptersof the text cover a
variety of topics that you need to get started

with your study of organic chemistry.
Chapter 1reviews the topics from general chemistry
that will be important to your study of organic chemistry.

The chapter starts with a description of the structure of
atoms and then proceeds to a description of the structure
of molecules. Molecular orbital theory is introduced.
AcidÐbase chemistry,which is central to understanding

many organic reactions,is reviewed. You will see how the

structure of a molecule affects its acidity and how the

acidity of a solution affects molecular structure.
To discuss organic compounds,you must be able to name
them and visualize their structures when you read or hear

their names. In Chapter 2,you will learn how to name
five different classes of organic compounds. This will

give you a good understanding of the basic rules followed

in naming compounds. Because the compounds exam-

ined in the chapter are either the reactants or the products

of many of the reactions presented in the next 10 chap-

ters,you will have the opportunity to review the nomen-

clature of these compounds as you proceed through those

chapters. The structures and physical properties of these

compounds will be compared and contrasted,which

makes learning about them a little easier than if each

compound were presented separately. Because organic

chemistry is a study of compounds that contain carbon,

the last part of Chapter2discusses the spatial arrange-

ment of the atoms in both chains and rings of carbon

atoms.An Introductionto the Study of OrganicChemistryChapter 1Electronic Structure and Bonding¥ Acids and BasesChapter 2An Introduction to OrganicCompounds:Nomenclature,
Physical Properties, andRepresentation of StructurePARTONE
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 1
To stay alive,early humans
must have been able to tell the

difference between twokinds of
materials in their world. ÒYou can live

on roots and berries,Óthey might have

said,Òbut you canÕt live on dirt. You can

stay warm by burning tree branches,but

you canÕt burn rocks.Ó
By the eighteenth century,scientists thought they
had grasped the nature of that difference,and in 1807,Jıns Jakob Berzelius gave

names to the two kinds of materials. Compounds derived from living organisms were

believed to contain an unmeasurable vital forceÑthe essence of life. These he called

Òorganic.ÓCompounds derived from mineralsÑthose lacking that vital forceÑwere

Òinorganic.Ó
Because chemists could not create life in the laboratory,they assumed they could not
create compounds with a vital force. With this mind-set,you can imagine how surprised

chemists were in 1828 when Friedrich Wıhler produced ureaÑa compound known to

be excreted by mammalsÑby heating ammonium cyanate,an inorganic mineral.
For the first time,an ÒorganicÓcompound had been obtained from something other
than a living organism and certainly without the aid of any kind of vital force. Clearly,

chemists needed a new definition for Òorganic compounds.Ó
Organic compounds
arenow defined as 
compounds that contain carbon.Why is an entire branch of chemistry devoted to the study of carbon-containing
compounds? We study organic chemistry because just about all of the molecules that
CNH2OheatNH4 OCNammonium cyanateH2Nurea
21Electronic Structure andBonding ¥ Acids and BasesGerman chemist 
Friedrich Wıhler
(1800Ð1882)began his professional
life as a physician and later became
a professor of chemistry at the Uni-

versity of Gıttingen. Wıhler codis-

covered the fact that two different

chemicals could have the same mo-

lecular formula. He also developed

methods of purifying aluminumÑat
the time,the most expensive metal on

EarthÑand beryllium.Jıns Jakob Berzelius (1779Ð1848)
not only coined the terms ÒorganicÓ

and Òinorganic,Óbut also invented

the system of chemical symbols still

used today. He published the first list

of accurate atomic weights and

proposed the idea that atoms carry

an electric charge. He purified or

discovered the elements cerium,

selenium,silicon,thorium,titanium,

and zirconium.
EthaneEthene
EthyneBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 2
Section 1.1The Structure of an Atom
3make life possible
Ñproteins,enzymes,vitamins,lipids,carbohydrates,and nucleic
acidsÑcontain carbon,so the chemical reactions that take place in living systems,in-
cluding our own bodies,are organic reactions. Most of the compounds found in

natureÑthose we rely on for food,medicine,clothing (cotton,wool,silk),and energy
(natural gas,petroleum)
Ñare organic as well. Important organic compounds are not,
however,limited to the ones we find in nature. Chemists have learned to synthesize

millions of organic compounds never found in nature,including synthetic fabrics,

plastics,synthetic rubber,medicines,and even things like photographic film and

Superglue. Many of these synthetic compounds prevent shortages of naturally occur-

ring products. For example,it has been estimated that if synthetic materials were not

available for clothing,all of the arable land in the United States would have to be used

for the production of cotton and wool just to provide enough material to clothe us.

Currently,there are about 16 million known organic compounds,and many more are

possible.What makes carbon so special? Why are there so many carbon-containing com-
pounds? The answer lies in carbon
Õs position in the periodic table. Carbon is in the
center of the second row of elements. The atoms to the left of carbon have a tendency

to give up electrons,whereas the atoms to the right have a tendency to accept electrons

(Section1.3).
Because carbon is in the middle,it neither readily gives up nor readily accepts elec-
trons. Instead,it shares electrons. Carbon can share electrons with several different

kinds of atoms,and it can also share electrons with other carbon atoms. Consequently,

carbon is able to form millions of stable compounds with a wide range of chemical

properties simply by sharing electrons.When we study organic chemistry,we study how organic compounds react. When
an organic compound reacts,some old bonds break and some new bonds form. Bonds

form when two atoms share electrons,and bonds break when two atoms no longer

share electrons. How readily a bond forms and how easily it breaks depend on the par-

ticular electrons that are shared,which,in turn,depend on the atoms to which the elec-

trons belong. So if we are going to start our study of organic chemistry at the

beginning,we must start with an understanding of the structure of an atom
Ñwhatelectrons an atom has and where they are located.
1.1The Structure of an Atom
An atom consists of a tiny dense nucleus surrounded by electrons that are spread
throughout a relatively large volume of space around the nucleus. The nucleus con-

tains positively charged protons and neutral neutrons,so it is positively charged. The

electrons are negatively charged. Because the amount of positive charge on a proton

equals the amount of negative charge on an electron,a neutral atom has an equal num-

ber of protons and electrons. Atoms can gain electrons and thereby become negatively

charged,or they can lose electrons and become positively charged. However,the num-

ber of protons in an atom does not change.Protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass and are about 1800 times
more massive than an electron. This means that most of the mass of an atom is in its

nucleus. However,most of the 
volumeof an atom is occupied by its electrons,and that
is where our focus will be because it is the electrons that form chemical bonds.LiBeBC
the second row of the periodic tableNOF
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 3
4CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesLouis Victor Pierre Raymond duc
de Broglie (1892Ð1987)
was born inFrance and studied history at the

Sorbonne. During World War I,he

was stationed in the Eiffel Tower as a

radio engineer. Intrigued by his expo-

sure to radio communications,he re-

turned to school after the war,earned

a Ph.D. in physics,and became a

professor of theoretical physics at the

Facult” des Sciences at the Sorbonne.

He received the Nobel Prize in

physics in 1929,five years after ob-

taining his degree,for his work that

showed electrons to have properties

of both particles and waves. In 1945,
he became an adviser to the French

Atomic Energy Commissariat.
Erwin Schrıdinger (1887Ð1961)
was teaching physics at the Universi-

ty of Berlin when Hitler rose to

power. Although not Jewish,

Schrıdinger left Germany to return

to his native Austria,only to see it

taken over later by the Nazis. He

moved to the School for Advanced

Studies in Dublin and then to Oxford

University. In 1933,he shared the

Nobel Prize in physics with Paul

Dirac,a professor of physics at Cam-

bridge University,for mathematical

work on quantum mechanics.
The atomic numberof an atom equals the number of protons in its nucleus. The
atomic number is also the number of electrons that surround the nucleus of a neutral

atom. For example,the atomic number of carbon is 6,which means that a neutral car-

bon atom has six protons and six electrons. Because the number of protons in an atom

does not change,the atomic number of a particular element is always the same
Ñallcarbon atoms have an atomic number of 6.
The mass numberof an atom is the 
sumof its protons and neutrons. Not all carbon
atoms have the same mass number,because,even though they all have the same num-

ber of protons,they do not all have the same number of neutrons. For example,

98.89% of naturally occurring carbon atoms have six neutrons
Ñgiving them a mass
number of 12
Ñand 1.11% have seven neutrons
Ñgiving them a mass number of 13.
These two different kinds of carbon atoms and are called isotopes. 
Isotopeshave the same atomic number (i.e.,the same number of protons),but different mass

numbers because they have different numbers of neutrons. The chemical properties of

isotopes of a given element are nearly identical.
Naturally occurring carbon also contains a trace amount of which has six pro-
tons and eight neutrons. This isotope of carbon is radioactive,decaying with a half-life

of 5730 years. (The half-life is the time it takes for one-half of the nuclei to decay.) As

long as a plant or animal is alive,it takes in as much as it excretes or exhales.

When it dies,it no longer takes in so the in the organism slowly decreases.

Therefore,the age of an organic substance can be determined by its content.
The atomic weightof a naturally occurring element is the average weighted
massof its atoms. Because an 
atomic mass unit (amu)is defined as exactly 
of themass of the atomic mass of is 12.0000 amu; the atomic 
mass of is 13.0034 amu. Therefore,the atomic weight of carbon is 12.011 amu
The molecular weightis thesum of the atomic weights of all the atoms in the molecule.PROBLEM1
Oxygen has three isotopes with mass numbers of 16,17,and 18. The atomic number of
oxygen is eight. How many protons and neutrons does each of the isotopes have?
1.2The Distribution of Electrons in an Atom
Electrons are moving continuously. Like anything that moves,electrons have kinetic
energy,and this energy is what counters the attractive force of the positively charged

protons that would otherwise pull the negatively charged electrons into the nucleus.

For a long time,electrons were perceived to be particles
Ñinfinitesimal 
ÒplanetsÓor-biting the nucleus of an atom. In 1924,however,a French physicist named Louis de

Broglie showed that electrons also have wavelike properties. He did this by combining

a formula developed by Einstein that relates mass and energy with a formula devel-

oped by Planck relating frequency and energy. The realization that electrons have

wavelike properties spurred physicists to propose a mathematical concept known as

quantum mechanics.Quantum mechanics
uses the same mathematical equations that describe the wave
motion of a guitar string to characterize the motion of an electron around a nucleus.

The version of quantum mechanics most useful to chemists was proposed by Erwin

Schrıdinger in 1926. According to Schr
ıdinger,the behavior of each electron in an
atom or a molecule can be described by a 
wave equation
. The solutions to the
Schrıdingerequation are called 
wave functions
or orbitals. They tell us the 
energy
ofthe electron and the volume of space
around the nucleus where an electron is most
likely to befound.
According to quantum mechanics,the electrons in an atom can be thought of as oc-
cupying a set of concentric shells that surround the nucleus. The first shell is the one
12.011.0.988912.00000.011113.003413C12C12C,11214C14C14C,14C14C,13C)(12CAn orbital tells us the energy of theelectron and the volume of space

around the nucleus where an electron 

is most likely to be found.BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 4
Section 1.2The Distribution of Electrons in an Atom
5ALBERT EINSTEIN
Albert Einstein (1879
Ð1955) was born in Germany. When he was in high school,
his father
Õs business failed and his family moved to Milan,Italy. Einstein had to
stay behind because German law required compulsory military service after finishing high

school. Einstein wanted to join his family in Italy. His high school mathematics teacher wrote a

letter saying that Einstein could have a nervous breakdown without his family and also that there

was nothing left to teach him. Eventually,Einstein was asked to leave the school because of his

disruptive behavior. Popular folklore says he left because of poor grades in Latin and Greek,but

his grades in those subjects were fine.
Einstein was visiting the United States when Hitler came to power,so he accepted a position
at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,becoming a U.S. citizen in 1940. Although a

lifelong pacifist,he wrote a letter to President Roosevelt warning of ominous advances in Ger-

man nuclear research. This led to the creation of the Manhattan Project,which developed the

atomic bomb and tested it in New Mexico in 1945.
MAX KARL ERNST LUDWIG PLANCKMax Planck (1858
Ð1947) was born in Germany,the son of a professor of civil law. He
was a professor at the Universities of Munich (1880
Ð1889) and Berlin (1889
Ð1926).Two of his daughters died in childbirth,and one of his sons was killed in action in World War I. In

1918,Planck received the Nobel Prize in physics for his development of quantum theory. He be-

came president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society of Berlin
Ñlater renamed the Max Planck SocietyÑin 1930. Planck felt that it was his duty to remain in Germany during the Nazi era,but he never

supported the Nazi regime. He unsuccessfully interceded with Hitler on behalf of his Jewish col-

leagues and,as a consequence,was forced to resign from the presidency of the Kaiser Wilhelm So-

ciety in 1937. A second son was accused of taking part in the plot to kill Hitler and was executed.

Planck lost his home to Allied bombings. He was rescued by Allied forces during the final days of

the war.
closest to the nucleus. The second shell lies farther from the nucleus,and even farther
out lie the third and higher numbered shells. Each shell contains subshells known as

atomic orbitals. Each atomic orbital has a characteristic shape and energy and occu-
pies a characteristic volume of space,which is predicted by the Schr
ıdinger equation.An important point to remember is that the closer the atomic orbital is to the nucleus,the lower is its energy.
The first shell consists of only an 
satomic orbital; the second shell consists of sandpatomic orbitals; the third shell consists of s,p,and 
datomic orbitals; and the fourthand higher shells consist of s,p,d,and atomic orbitals(Table1.1
).Each shell contains one satomic orbital. The second and higher shells
Ñin addition
to their sorbitalÑeach contain three degenerate p
atomic orbitals. Degenerateorbitalsare orbitals that have the same energy. The third and higher shells
ÑinThe closer the orbital is to the nucleus,the lower is its energy.
Table1.1Distribution of Electrons in the First Four Shells 
That Surround the Nucleus
First shellSecond shellThird shellFourth shell
Atomic orbitalsNumber of atomic orbitals11,31,3,51,3,5,7

Maximum number of electrons281832
, , , , , , BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 5
6CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Basesaddition to their sand porbitalsÑalso contain five degenerate 
datomic orbitals,and
the fourth and higher shells also contain seven degenerate atomic orbitals. Because

a maximum of two electrons can coexist in an atomic orbital (see the Pauli exclusion

principle,below),the first shell,with only one atomic orbital,can contain no more

than two electrons. The second shell,with four atomic orbitals
Ñone sand three pÑcan have a total of eight electrons. Eighteen electrons can occupy the nine atomic

orbitalsÑone s,three 
p,and five 
dÑof the third shell,and 32 electrons can occupy the
16 atomic orbitals of the fourth shell. In studying organic chemistry,we will be con-

cerned primarily with atoms that have electrons only in the first and second shells.
The ground-state electronic configuration
of an atom describes the orbitals occu-
pied by the atom
Õs electrons when they are all in the available orbitals with the lowest en-
ergy. If energy is applied to an atom in the ground state,one or more electrons can jump

into a higher energy orbital. The atom then would be in an 
excited-state electronic
configuration
. The ground-state electronic configurations of the 11 smallest atoms are
shown inTable1.2. (Each arrow
Ñwhether pointing up or down
Ñrepresents one elec-tron.) The following principles are used to determine which orbitals electrons occupy:
1.The 
aufbau principle(aufbauis German for Òbuilding up
Ó) tells us the first
thing we need to know to be able to assign electrons to the various atomic or-

bitals. According to this principle,an electron always goes into the available or-

bital with the lowest energy. The relative energies of the atomic orbitals are as

follows:
Because a 1satomic orbital is closer to the nucleus,it is lower in energy than a
2satomic orbital,which is lower in energy
Ñand is closer to the nucleusÑthan a3satomic orbital. Comparing atomic orbitals in the same shell,we see that an 
satomic orbital is lower in energy than a 
patomic orbital,and a 
patomic orbital islower in energy than a 
datomic orbital.2.The 
Pauli exclusion principle
states that (a)no more than two electrons can oc-
cupy each atomic orbital,and (b)the two electrons must be of opposite spin. It is

called an exclusion principle because it states that only so many electrons can

occupy any particular shell. Notice in Table1.2that spin in one direction is des-

ignated by an upward-pointing arrow,and spin in the opposite direction by a

downward-pointingarrow.
64567512233434545As a teenager,Austrian 
Wolfgang
Pauli (1900Ð1958)
wrote articles on
relativity that caught the attention of

Albert Einstein. Pauli went on to

teach physics at the University of

Hamburg and at the Zurich Institute

of Technology. When World War II

broke out,he immigrated to the Unit-

ed States,where he joined the Insti-

tute for Advanced Study at Princeton.
TABLE 1.2
The Ground-State Electronic Configurations of the Smallest Atoms
Name ofelementAtomicnumberAtom1
s2s2px2py2pz3sHHydrogen1
HeHelium2
LiLithium3
BeBeryllium4
BBoron5
CCarbon6
NNitrogen7
OOxygen8
FFluorine9
NeNeon10
NaSodium11
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 6
Section 1.3Ionic, Covalent, and Polar Bonds
7Friedrich Hermann Hund(1896Ð1997)was born in Germany.
He was a professor of physics at sev-

eral German universities,the last

being the University of Gıttingen. He

spent a year as a visiting professor at

Harvard University. In February

1996,the University of Gıttingen

held a symposium to honor Hund on
his 100th birthday.
From these first two rules,we can assign electrons to atomic orbitals for atoms that
contain one,two,three,four,or five electrons. The single electron of a hydrogen atom

occupies a 1satomic orbital,the second electron of a helium atom fills the 1
satomicorbital,the third electron of a lithium atom occupies a 2
satomic orbital,the fourth
electron of a beryllium atom fills the 2
satomic orbital,and the fifth electron of a boron
atom occupies one of the 2
patomic orbitals. (The subscripts x,y,and 
zdistinguish thethree 2patomic orbitals.) Because the three porbitals are degenerate,the electron can
be put into any one of them. Before we can continue to larger atoms
Ñthose contain-ing six or more electronsÑwe need HundÕs rule:3.HundÕs rulestates that when there are degenerate orbitals
Ñtwo or more orbitals
with the same energy
Ñan electron will occupy an empty orbital before it will
pair up with another electron. In this way,electron repulsion is minimized. The

sixth electron of a carbon atom,therefore,goes into an empty 2
patomic orbital,rather than pairing up with the electron already occupying a 2
patomic orbital.(See Table1.2.) The seventh electron of a nitrogen atom goes into an empty 2
patomic orbital,and the eighth electron of an oxygen atom pairs up with an elec-

tron occupying a 2
patomic orbital rather than going into a higher energy 3
sorbital.Using these three rules,the locations of the electrons in the remaining elements can be
assigned.PROBLEM2
Potassium has an atomic number of 19 and one unpaired electron. What orbital does the
unpaired electron occupy?
PROBLEM 3Write electronic configurations for chlorine (atomic number 17),bromine (atomic number

35),and iodine (atomic number 53).
1.3Ionic, Covalent, and Polar BondsIn trying to explain why atoms form bonds,G. N. Lewis proposed that 
an atom is most
stable if its outer shell is either filled or contains eight electrons and it has no electrons

of higher energy
. According to Lewis
Õs theory,an atom will give up,accept,or share
electrons in order to achieve a filled outer shell or an outer shell that contains eight

electrons. This theory has come to be called the 
octet rule.Lithium (Li) has a single electron in its 2
satomic orbital. If it loses this electron,the
lithium atom ends up with a filled outer shell
Ña stable configuration. Removing an
electron from an atom takes energy
Ñcalled the ionization energy
. Lithium has a rel-
atively low ionization energy
Ñthe drive to achieve a filled outer shell with no elec-
trons of higher energy causes it to lose an electron relatively easily. Sodium (Na) has a

single electron in its 3satomic orbital. Consequently,sodium also has a relatively low
ionization energy because,when it loses an electron,it is left with an outer shell of

eight electrons. Elements (such as lithium and sodium) that have low ionization ener-

gies are said to be 
electropositive
Ñthey readily lose an electron and thereby become
positively charged. The elements in the first column of the periodic table are all

electropositive
Ñeach readily loses an electron because each has a single electron in its
outermost shell.Electrons in inner shells (those below the outermost shell) are called 
core electrons
.Core electrons do not participate in chemical bonding. Electrons in the outermost shell

are called valence electrons
,and the outermost shell is called the valence shell. Car-
bon,for example,has two core electrons and four valence electrons (Table 1.2).
Tutorial:
Electrons in orbitalsBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 7
8CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesLithium and sodium each have one valence electron. Elements in the same column
of the periodic table have the same number of valence electrons,and because the num-

ber of valence electrons is the major factor determining an element
Õs chemical proper-ties,elements in the same column of the periodic table have similar chemical

properties. Thus,the chemical behavior of an element depends on its electronic

configuration.
PROBLEM 4Compare the ground-state electronic configurations of the following atoms,and check the
relative positions of the atomsin Table1.3on p.10.
a.carbon and siliconc.fluorine and bromine
b.oxygen and sulfurd.magnesium and calcium
When we draw the electrons around an atom,as in the following equations,core
electrons are not shown; only valence electrons are shown. Each valence electron is

shown as a dot. Notice that when the single valence electron of lithium or sodium is

removed,the resulting atom
Ñnow called an ion
Ñcarries a positive charge.
Fluorine has seven valence electrons (Table 1.2). Consequently,it readily acquires
an electron in order to have an outer shell of eight electrons. When an atom acquires an

electron,energy is released. Elements in the same column as fluorine (e.g.,chlorine,

bromine,and iodine) also need only one electron to have an outer shell of eight,so

they,too,readily acquire an electron. Elements that readily acquire an electron are said

to be 
electronegative
Ñthey acquire an electron easily and thereby become negatively
charged.
Ionic BondsBecause sodium gives up an electron easily and chlorine acquires an electron readily,

when sodium metal and chlorine gas are mixed,each sodium atom transfers an elec-

tron to a chlorine atom,and crystalline sodium chloride (table salt) is formed as a re-

sult. The positively charged sodium ions and negatively charged chloride ions are

independent species held together by the attraction of opposite charges (Figure1.1). A

bondis an attractive force between two atoms. Attractive forces between opposite
charges are called 
electrostatic attractions
. A bondthat is the result of only electro-
static attractions is called an ionic bond. Thus,an 
ionic bondis formed when there is
a transfer of electrons
,causing one atom to become a positively charged ion and the
other to become a negatively charged ion.
eCleFFClLiLieNaNaea.b.
Figure 1.1
(a)Crystalline sodium chloride.
(b)The electron-rich chloride ions

are red and the electron-poor
sodium ions are blue. Each chloride
ion is surrounded by six sodium
ions, and each sodium ion is
surrounded by six chloride ions.
Ingore the ÒbondsÓ holding the
balls together; they are there only
to keep the model from falling
apart.3-D Molecule:Sodium chloride latticeBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 8
Section 1.3Ionic, Covalent, and Polar Bonds
9Sodium chloride is an example of an ionic compound. 
Ionic compoundsareformed when an element on the left side of the periodic table (an electropositive ele-

ment) transfers one or more electrons to an element on the right side of the periodic

table (an electronegative element).
Covalent BondsInstead of giving up or acquiring electrons,an atom can achieve a filled outer shell by

sharing electrons. For example,two fluorine atoms can each attain a filled shell of

eight electrons by sharing their unpaired valence electrons. A bond formed as a result

of sharing electrons
is called a covalent bond
.Two hydrogen atoms can form a covalent bond by sharing electrons. As a result of co-
valent bonding,each hydrogen acquires a stable,filled outer shell (with two electrons).
Similarly,hydrogen and chlorine can form a covalent bond by sharing electrons. In doing
so,hydrogen fills its only shell and chlorine achieves an outer shell of eight electrons.
A hydrogen atom can achieve a completely empty shell by losing an electron. Loss
of its sole electron results in a positively charged 
hydrogen ion
. A positively charged
hydrogen ion is called a proton
because when a hydrogen atom loses its valence elec-
tron,only the hydrogen nucleus
Ñwhich consists of a single protonÑremains. Ahy-
drogen atom can achieve a filled outer shell by gaining an electron,thereby forming a

negatively charged hydrogen ion,called a 
hydride ion
.Because oxygen has six valence electrons,it needs to form two covalent bonds to
achieve an outer shellof eight electrons. Nitrogen,with five valence electrons,must

form three covalent bonds,and carbon,with four valence electrons,must form four co-

valent bonds to achieve a filled outer shell. Notice that all the atoms in water,ammo-

nia,and methane have filled outer shells.
2 HHHwaterOO3 HHHHammoniaNN4 HHHHHmethaneCCHHa protona hydrogen atoma hydrogen atomHH  a hydride ion+eÐ+eÐHHClClHHHHFFFFa covalent bondClNaClClNaClClNaNasodium chlorideionic bondShown is a bronze sculpture of
Albert Einsteinon the grounds of
the National Academy of Sciences in

Washington,DC. The statue mea-

sures 21 feet from the top of the head

to the tip of the feet and weighs 7000
pounds. In his left hand,Einstein

holds the mathematical equations
that represent his three most impor-

tant contributions to science:the

photoelectric effect,the equivalency

of energy and matter,and the theory

of relativity. At his feet is a map of

the sky.
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 9
10CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesPolar Covalent BondsIn the and covalent bonds shown previously,the atoms that share the
bonding electrons are identical. Therefore,they share the electrons equally; that is,

each electron spends as much time in the vicinity of one atom as in the other. An even

(nonpolar) distribution of charge results. Such a bond is called a 
nonpolar covalent
bond.In contrast,the bonding electrons in hydrogen chloride,water,and ammonia are
more attracted to one atom than another because the atoms that share the electrons in

these molecules are different and have different electronegativities. 
Electronegativity
is the tendency of an atom to pull bonding electrons toward itself. The bonding elec-

trons in hydrogen chloride,water,and ammonia molecules are more attracted to the

atom with the greater electronegativity. This results in a polar distribution of charge. A

polar covalent bond
is a covalent bond between atoms of different electronegativities.
The electronegativities of some of the elements are shown in Table1.3. Notice that

electronegativity increases as you go from left to right across a row of the periodic

table or up any of the columns.
A polar covalent bond has a slight positive charge on one end and a slight nega-
tive charge on the other. Polarity in a covalent bond is indicated by the symbols 

and which denote partial positive and partial negative charges,respectively. The

negative end of the bond is the end that has the more electronegative atom. The

greater the difference in electronegativity between the bonded atoms,the more polar

the bond will be.The direction of bond polarity can be indicated with an arrow. By convention,the
arrow points in the direction in which the electrons are pulled,so the head of the arrow

is at the negative end of the bond; a short perpendicular line near the tail of the arrow

marks the positive end of the bond.
HClHHClH
O
HHNHd,dHHFFTABLE 1.3
The Electronegativities of Selected Elements
aaElectronegativity values are relative, not absolute. As a result, there are several scales of electronegativities. The
electronegativities listed here are from the scale devised by Linus Pauling.
IAIIAIBIIBIIIAIVAVAVIAVIIA
increasing electronegativity
increasing electronegativity
H2.1Li1.0Na0.9K0.8Be1.5Mg1.2B2.0Al1.5C2.5Si1.8N3.0P2.1O3.5S2.5F4.0Cl3.0Br2.8I2.5Ca1.0BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 10
Section 1.3Ionic, Covalent, and Polar Bonds
11You can think of ionic bonds and nonpolar covalent bonds as being at the opposite
ends of a continuum of bond types. An ionic bond involves no sharing of electrons. A

nonpolar covalent bond involves equal sharing. Polar covalent bonds fall somewhere

in between,and the greater the difference in electronegativity between the atoms form-

ing the bond,the closer the bond is to the ionic end of the continuum. bonds are

relatively nonpolar,because carbon and hydrogen have similar electronegativities

(electronegativity see Table1.3). bonds are relatively polar

(electronegativity ),but not as polar as bonds (electronegativ-

ity ). The bond between sodium and chloride ions is closer to the

ionic end of the continuum (electronegativity ),but sodium chloride

is not as ionic as potassium fluoride (electronegativity ).
PROBLEM 5Which of the following has
a.the most polar bond?b.the least polar bond?
NaILiBrKCl
Understanding bond polarity is critical to understanding how organic reactions
occur,because a central rule that governs the reactivity of organic compounds is that

electron-rich atoms or molecules are attracted to electron-deficient atoms or mole-

cules. Electrostatic potential maps
(often simply called potential maps) are modelsthat show how charge is distributed in the molecule under the map. Therefore,these

maps show the kind of electrostatic attraction an atom or molecule has for another

atom or molecule,so you can use them to predict chemical reactions. The potential

maps for LiH,and HF are shown below.
The colors on a potential map indicate the degree to which a molecule or an atom in
a molecule attracts charged particles. Red
Ñsignifying the most negative electrostatic
potentialÑis used for regions that attract positively charged molecules most strongly,
and blue is used for areas with the most positive electrostatic potential
Ñthat is,re-
gions that attract negatively charged molecules most strongly. Other colors indicate in-

termediate levels of attraction.
most negativeelectrostatic potential
most positiveelectrostatic potential
redorange
yellowgreen
blueLiHH
2HFH2,Cl2polarcovalent bondionicbondnonpolarcovalent bondcontinuum of bond typesK+ FÐ    Na+ClÐ             O    H      N    H                      C    H, C    Cdifference3.2difference2.1difference1.4OHdifference0.9NHdifference0.4;CHTutorial:
Electronegativity differences

and bond typesBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 11
12CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesThe colors on a potential map can also be used to estimate charge distribution. For
example,the potential map for LiH indicates that the hydrogen atom is more negative-

ly charged than the lithium atom. By comparing the three maps,we can tell that the

hydrogen in LiH is more negatively charged than a hydrogen in and the hydrogen

in HF is more positively charged than a hydrogen in 
A moleculeÕs size and shape are determined by the number of electrons in the
molecule and by the way they move. Because a potential map roughly marks the

ÒedgeÓof the moleculeÕs electron cloud,the map tells us something about the rela-
tive size and shape of the molecule. Notice that a given kind of atom can have dif-

ferent sizes in different molecules. The negatively charged hydrogen in LiH is

bigger than a neutral hydrogen in which,in turn,is bigger than the positively

charged hydrogen in HF.
PROBLEM 6After examining the potential maps for LiH,HF,and answer the following questions:
a.Which compounds are polar?
b.Why does LiH have the largest hydrogen?

c.Which compound has the most positively charged hydrogen?
A polar bond has a 
dipoleÑit has a negative end and a positive end. The size of the
dipole is indicated by the dipole moment,which is given the Greek letter The

dipole momentof a bond is equal to the magnitude of the charge on the atom
(either the partial positive charge or the partial negative charge,because they have the

same magnitude) times the distance between the two charges 
A dipole moment is reported in a unit called a 
debye (D)
(pronounced de-bye). Be-
cause the charge on an electron is electrostatic units (esu) and the dis-

tance between charges in a polar bond is on the order of the product

ofcharge and distance is on the order of cm. A dipole moment of
cm can be more simply stated as 1.5D. The dipole moments of some
bonds commonly found in organic compounds are listedin Table1.4
.In a molecule with only one covalent bond,the dipole moment of the molecule is
identical to the dipole moment of the bond. For example,the dipole moment of hydro-

gen chloride (HCl) is 1.1D because the dipole moment of the single bond is

1.1D. The dipole moment of a molecule with more than one covalent bond depends

on the dipole moments of all the bonds in the molecule and the geometry of the mole-
cule. We will examine the dipole moments of molecules with more than one covalent

bond in Section1.15after you learn about the geometry of molecules.
HCl1.51018 esu1018 esu108 cm,4.801010dipole momentm:m.H2,H2,H2.H2,Peter Debye (1884
Ð1966)was bornin the Netherlands. He taught at the
univerh (succeeding

Einstein),Leipzig,and Berlin,but re-

turned to his homeland in 1939 when
the Nazis ordered him to become a

German citizen. Upon visiting Cor-
nell to give a lecture,he decided to

stay in the country,and he became a

U.S. citizen in 1946. He received the

Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1936 for

his work on dipole moments and the
properties of solutions.
Table 1.4The Dipole Moments of Some Commonly Encountered Bonds
BondDipole moment (D)BondDipole moment (D)
0.40
1.30.2

1.50.7

1.71.6

1.11.5

0.81.4

0.41.2
CIHICBrHBrCClHClCFHFCOHOCNHNCCHC3-D Molecules:LiH; ; HF
H2 BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 12
Section 1.4Representation of Structure
13American chemist 
Gilbert NewtonLewis (1875Ð1946)was born inWeymouth,Massachusetts,and re-

ceived a Ph.D. from Harvard in

1899. He was the first person to pre-

pare Òheavy water,Ówhich has deu-

terium atoms in place of the usual
hydrogen atoms (versus ).

Because heavy water can be used as
a moderator of neutrons,it became

important in the development of the

atomic bomb. Lewis started his ca-

reer as a professor at the Massachu-

setts Institute of Technology and

joined the faculty at the University of

California,Berkeley,in 1912.
H2OD2O*The angstrom (
†) is not a Syst‘me International unit. Those who opt to adhere strictly to SI units
can convert it into picometers:1 picometer Because

the angstrom continues to be used by many organic chemists,we will use angstroms in this book.
pm1012  m; 1 †1010  m100 pm.PROBLEM 7SOLVED
Determine the partial negative charge on the oxygen atom in a bond. The bond
length is 1.22†*and the bond dipole moment is 2.30D.
SOLUTIONIf there were a full negative charge on the oxygen atom,the dipole moment
would be
Knowing that the dipole moment is 2.30D,we calculate that the partial negative charge on
the oxygen atom is about 0.4:PROBLEM 8Use the symbols and to show the direction of polarity of the indicated bond in each
of the following compounds (for example,).
a.c.e.g.
b.d.f.h.
1.4Representation of Structure
Lewis Structures
The chemical symbols we have been using,in which the valence electrons are repre-
sented as dots,are called 
Lewis structures
. Lewis structures are useful because they
show us which atoms are bonded together and tell us whether any atoms possess 
lone-pair electrons
or havea 
formal charge
.The Lewis structures for and are shown below.
When you draw a Lewis structure,make sure that hydrogen atoms are surround-
ed by no more than two electrons and that C,O,N,and halogen (F,Cl,Br,I) atoms

are surrounded by no more than eight electronsÑthey must obey the octet rule. Va-
lence electrons not used in bonding are called 
nonbonding electrons
or lone-pairelectrons
.Once the atoms and the electrons are in place,each atom must be examined to see
whether a charge should be assigned to it. A positive or a negative charge assigned to

an atom is called a 
formal charge
; the oxygen atom in the hydronium ion has a formal
charge of and the oxygen atom in the hydroxide ion has a formal charge of A

formal charge
is the difference
between the number of valence electrons an atom has
when it is not bonded to any other atoms and the number of electrons it 
Òowns
Ówhenit is bonded. An atom 
Òowns
Óall of its lone-pair electrons and half of its bonding
(shared) electrons.formal charge number of valence electrons             (number of lone-pair electrons 1/2 number of bonding electrons)1.1,HHwaterOHHhydrogen peroxideOOHHHhydronium ionOHhydroxide ionOlone-pair electronsH2O2H2O, H3O, HO,H2NOHH3CMgBrH3CClFBrIClHOBrH3CNH2HOHH3COH
dd2.30
5.86
0.39
4.801010 esu1.22108 cm5.861018 esu cm5.86 DCOBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 13
14CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesFor example,an oxygen atom has six valence electrons (Table1.2). In water 
oxygen Òowns
Ósix electrons (four lone-pair electrons and half of the four bonding
electrons). Because the number of electrons it Òowns
Óis equal to the number of its va-
lence electrons the oxygen atom in water has no formal charge. The

oxygen atom in the hydronium ion 
Òowns
Ófive electrons:two lone-pair elec-
trons plus three (half of six) bonding electrons. Because the number of electrons it

Òowns
Óis one less than the number of its valence electrons its formal
charge is The oxygen atom in hydroxide ion 
Òowns
Óseven electrons:six
lone-pair electrons plus one (half of two) bonding electron. Because it 
Òowns
Óonemore electron than the number of its valence electrons its formal

charge is 
PROBLEM 9A formal charge is a bookkeeping device. It does not necessarily indicate that the atom has
greater or less electron density than other atoms in the molecule without formal charges.

You can see this by examining the potential maps for and 
a.Which atom bears the formal negative charge in the hydroxide ion?
b.Which atom is the most negative in the hydroxide ion?
c.Which atom bears the formal positive charge in the hydronium ion?

d.Which atom is the most positive in the hydronium ion?
Knowing that nitrogen has five valence electrons (Table1.2),convince yourself that
the appropriate formal charges have been assigned to the nitrogen atoms in the follow-

ing Lewis structures:
Carbon has four valence electrons. Take a moment to confirm why the carbon
atoms in the following Lewis structures have the indicated formal charges:
A species containing a positively charged carbon atom is called a 
carbocation,and a
species containing a negatively charged carbon atom is called a 
carbanion. (Recallthat a cationis a positively charged ion and an 
anionis a negatively charged ion.) Car-
bocations were formerly called carbonium ions,so you will see this term in older

chemical literature. A species containing an atom with a single unpaired electron is

called a radical(often called a free radical
). Hydrogen has one valence electron,and
each halogen (F,Cl,Br,I) has seven valence electrons,so the following species have

the indicated formal charges:
HHHmethyl cationa carbocationCHHHmethyl aniona carbanionCHHHmethyl radicalCHHHHmethaneCHHHethaneCHHHCHHHHammonium ionNHHamide anionNHHHammoniaNHHhydrazineNHHNHO.H2O, H3O,H3OHOH2O1.671,(HO)1.651,(H3O)660,(H2O),Movie:Formal chargeBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 14
Section 1.4Representation of Structure
15In studyingthe molecules in this section,notice that when the atoms don
Õt bear aformal charge or an unpaired electron,hydrogen and the halogens each have 
onecova-
lent bond,oxygen always has 
twocovalent bonds,nitrogen always has 
three
covalent
bonds,and carbon has 
fourcovalent bonds. Notice that (except for hydrogen) the sum
of the number of bonds and lone pairs is four:The halogens,with one bond,have three

lone pairs; oxygen,with two bonds,has two lone pairs; and nitrogen,with three bonds,

has one lone pair. Atoms that have more bonds or fewer bonds than the number re-

quired for a neutral atom will have either a formal charge or an unpaired electron.

These numbers are very important to remember when you are first drawing structures

of organic compounds because they provide a quick way to recognize when you have

made a mistake.
In the Lewis structures for and notice that each
atom has a complete octet (except hydrogen,which has a filled outer shell) and that

each atom has the appropriate formal charge. (In drawing the Lewis structure for a

compound that has two or more oxygen atoms,avoid oxygen
Ðoxygen single bonds.These are weak bonds,and few compounds have them.)
A pair of shared electrons can also be shown as a line between two atoms. Compare
the preceding structures with the following ones:
Suppose you are asked to draw a Lewis structure. In this example,we will use
1.Determine the total number of valence electrons (1 for H,5 for N,and 6 for each
).2.Use the number of valence electrons to form bonds and fill octets with lone-pair
electrons.3.If after all the electrons have been assigned,any atom (other than hydrogen) does
not have a complete octet,use a lone pair to form a double bond.
4.Assign a formal charge to any atom whose number of valence electrons is not
equal to the number of its lone-pair electrons plus one-half its bonding electrons.

(None of the atoms in has a formal charge.)
ONHOuse a pair of electronsto form a double bondN does not havea complete octetdouble bond18 electrons have been assignedONHOby using one of oxygenÕs lone pairsto form a double bond, N gets a
complete octetHNO2O151218HNO2  .COHOHCHOHONOHOOCOONNHCHOOOCOOHNNNOOOHHCON2,CH2O2, HNO3, CH2O, CO3 2,three bondsfour bonds
one bondtwo bonds
one bondONCHFClIBrHhydrideionHhydrogenradicalBrBrBrClClBrbromideionHhydrogenionbromineradicalbrominechlorine
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 15
16CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesKekul” Structures
In Kekul
” structures
,the bonding electrons are drawn as lines and the lone-pair elec-
trons are usually left out entirely,unless they are needed to draw attention to some

chemical property of the molecule. (Although lone-pair electrons may not be shown,

you should remember that neutral nitrogen,oxygen,and halogen atoms always have

them:one pair in the case of nitrogen,two pairs in the case of oxygen,and three pairs

in the case of a halogen.)Condensed Structures
Frequently,structures are simplified by omitting some (or all) of the covalent bonds

and listing atoms bonded to a particular carbon (or nitrogen or oxygen) next to it with

a subscript to indicate the number of such atoms. These kinds of structures are called

condensed structures
. Compare the preceding structures with the following ones:
You can find more examples of condensed structures and the conventions common-
ly used to create them in Table1.5. Notice that since none of the molecules in

Table1.5have a formal charge or an unpaired electron,each C has four bonds,each N

has three bonds,each O has two bonds,and each H or halogen has one bond.
CH3NH2CH4HNO2HCNHCO2HCOHOHCHHCHHHHCHHHNHNOOHNTable1.5Kekul
” and Condensed Structures
Kekul
” structureCondensed structures
Atoms bonded to a carbon are shown to the right of the carbon. Atoms other than H can be shown hanging from the carbon.
Repeating groups can be shown in parentheses.
Groups bonded to a carbon can be shown (in parentheses) to the right of the carbon,or hanging from the carbon.
Groups bonded to the far-right carbon are not put in parentheses.
HHCHHHOH
HCHCCH3CH3CCH
3CH2C(CH3)2CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CCH2CH2OHorHCH3CH3CHHHCHHHH
OHHCHCHCH3CCH
3CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH(OH)CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH3orHCH3OHCHHCHHCHHCHCHCCH
3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3(CH2)4CH3orHHCHCHHHHHCH2HHCHHCHBrCHHCCH
3CHBrCH
2CH2CHClCH3CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3orHHCHClBrClCHHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 16
Section 1.4Representation of Structure
17Kekul
” structureCondensed structures
Two or more identical groups considered bonded to the 
Òfirst
Óatom on the left can be shown (in parentheses) to the left of that
atom,or hanging from the atom.
An oxygen doubly bonded to a carbon can be shown hanging off the carbon or to the right of the carbon.
OorO)CH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2COCH3orCH3CH2C(OorOCH3CH2CH2CHCH
3CH2CH2CHOorCH3CH2CH2CHOorCH3CH2COHCH
3CH2CO2HorCH3CH2COOHOorCH3CH2COCH3CH3CH2CO2CH3orCH3CH2COOCH3HHCH(CH3)2NCH2CH2CH3CH3NCH2CH2CH3orCH3CHHHCHHHHH
HCCHNHHC(CH3)2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3orCH3HHHHH
HCCHHHCHHCHCPROBLEM 10SOLVED
Draw the Lewis structure for each of the following:
a.d.g.j.NaOH
b.e.h.k.

c.f.i.l.
SOLUTION TO 10a
The only way we can arrange one N and three O
Õs and avoid
single bonds is to place the three O
Õs around the N. The total number of valence
electrons is 23 (5 for N,and 6 for each of the three O
Õs). Because the species has one neg-
ative charge,we must add 1 to the number of valence electrons,for a total of 24. We then

use the 24 electrons to form bonds and fill octets with lone-pair electrons.
When all 24 electrons have been assigned,we see that N does not have a complete octet. We
complete NÕs octet by using one of oxygen
Õs lone pairs to from a double bond. (It doesnÕtmake any difference which oxygen atom we choose.) When we check each atom to see

whether it has a formal charge,we find that two of the O
Õs are negatively charged and the N
is positively charged,for an overall charge of 
ONOO1.ONOOOONa2CO3CH3N2NO2 NH4ClC2H5HCO3 NO2 CH3NH3 CO2NO3 Table 1.5(continued)
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 17
18CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesSOLUTION TO 10b
The total number of valence electrons is 17 (5 for N and 6 for each
of the two O
Õs). Because the species has one positive charge,we must subtract 1 from the
number of valence electrons,for a total of 16. The 16 electrons are used to form bonds and

fill octets with lone-pair electrons.
Two double bonds are necessary to complete N
Õs octet. The N has a formal charge of
PROBLEM 11a.Draw two Lewis structures for b.Draw three Lewis structures for 
(Hint:The two Lewis structures in part a are 
constitutional isomers; they have the same
atoms,but differ in the way the atoms are connected. The three Lewis structures in part b

are also constitutional isomers.)PROBLEM 12Expand the following condensed structures to show the covalent bonds and lone-pair

electrons:a.c.
b.d.
1.5Atomic OrbitalsWe have seen that electrons are distributed into different atomic orbitals (Table1.2).
An orbitalis a three-dimensional region around the nucleus where there is a high
probability of finding an electron. But what does an orbital look like? Mathematical

calculations indicate that the satomic orbital is a sphere with the nucleus at its center,
and experimental evidence supports this theory. The 
Heisenberg uncertainty
principlestates that both the precise location and the momentum of an atomic particle
cannot be simultaneously determined. This means that we can never say precisely

where an electron is
Ñwe can only describe its probable location. Thus,when we say
that an electron occupies a 1satomic orbital,we mean that there is a greater than 90%
probability that the electron is in the space defined by the sphere.
Because the average distance from the nucleus is greater for an electron in a 2
satomic orbital than for an electron in a 1
satomic orbital,a 2
satomic orbital is repre-sented by a larger sphere. Consequently,the average electron density in a 2
satomic or-bital is less than the average electron density in a 1
satomic orbital.An electron in a 1
satomic orbital can be anywhere within the 1
ssphere,but a 2
satom-ic orbital has a region where the probability of finding an electron falls to zero. This is

called a node,or,more precisely
Ñsince the absence of electron density is at one set dis-tance from nucleusÑa radial node
. So a 2
selectron can be found anywhere within the
2ssphereÑincluding the region of space defined by the 1
ssphereÑexcept in the node.
(CH3)3C(CH2)3CH(CH3)2(CH3)2CHCl(CH3)2CHCHOCH3NHCH2CH3C3H8O.C2H6O.NOO1.NOO2s atomic orbitalnode shownzxy2s atomic orbitalnode not shownzxyzxnode1s atomic orbitalyBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 18
Section 1.5Atomic Orbitals
19To understand why nodes occur,you need to remember that electrons have both
particlelike and wavelike properties. A node is a consequence of the wavelike proper-

ties of an electron. Consider the following two types of waves:traveling waves and

standing waves. Traveling waves move through space; light is an example of a travel-

ing wave. A standing wave,in contrast,is confined to a limited space. A vibrating

string of a guitar is an example of a standing wave
Ñthe string moves up and down,but
does not travel through space. If you were to write a wave equation for the guitar

string,the wave function would be in the region above where the guitar string is

at rest and in the region below where the guitar string is at rest
Ñthe regions are of
opposite phase. The region where the guitar string has no transverse displacement is

called a node. A nodeis the region where a standing wave has an amplitude of zero.
An electron behaves like a standing wave,but
Ñunlike the wave created by a vi-
brating guitar stringÑit is three dimensional. This means that the node of a 2
satomicorbital is actually a surface
Ña spherical surface within the 2
satomic orbital. Becausethe electron wave has zero amplitude at the node,there is zero probability of finding

an electron at the node.Unlike 
satomic orbitals that resemble spheres,
patomic orbitals have two lobes.
Generally,the lobes are depicted as teardrop-shaped,but computer-generated represen-

tations reveal that they are shaped more like doorknobs. Like the vibrating guitar string,

the lobes are of opposite phase,which can be designated by plus and minus 

signs or by two different colors. (In this context,and do not indicate charge,just

the phase of the orbital.) The node of the 
patomic orbital is a plane that passes throughthe center of the nucleus,bisecting its two lobes. This is called a 
nodal plane
. There is
zero probability of finding an electron in the nodal plane of the 
porbital.In Section1.2,you saw that there are three degenerate 
patomic orbitals. The or-
bital is symmetrical about the 
x-axis,the orbital is symmetrical about the 
y-axis,and the orbital is symmetrical about the 
z-axis. This means that each 
porbital is per-pendicular to the other two 
porbitals. The energy of a 2
patomic orbital is slightlygreater than that of a 2
satomic orbital because the average location of an electron in a
2patomic orbital is farther away from the nucleus.
zyxyxzyx2px orbital2
py orbital2
pz orbitalzDegenerate orbitals are orbitals that
have the same energy.
upward displacement  the peakvibrating guitar stringpluck theguitar stringnodedownward displacement  the troughor2p atomic orbitalcomputer-generated
2p atomic orbital2p atomic orbitalnodal planenodal planeBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 19
20CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Bases1.6An Introduction to Molecular Orbital Theory
How do atoms form covalent bonds in order to form molecules? The Lewis model,
which describes how atoms attain a complete octet by sharing electrons,tells us only

part of the story. A drawback of the model is that it treats electrons like particles and

does not take into account their wavelike properties.
Molecular orbital (MO) theory
combines the tendency of atoms to fill their octets
by sharing electrons (the Lewis model) with their wavelike properties
Ñassigningelectrons to a volume of space called an orbital. According to MO theory,covalent

bonds result from the combination of atomic orbitals to form 
molecular orbitalsÑorbitals that belong to the whole molecule rather than to a single atom. Like an atomic

orbital that describes the volume of space around the nucleus of an atom where an

electron is likely to be found,a molecular orbital describes the volume of space around

a molecule where an electron is likely to be found. Like atomic orbitals,molecular or-

bitals have specific sizes,shapes,and energies.
LetÕs look first at the bonding in a hydrogen molecule As the 1
satomic orbitalof one hydrogen atom approaches the 1
satomic orbital of a second hydrogen atom,they begin to overlap. As the atomic orbitals move closer together,the amount of over-

lap increases until the orbitals combine to form a molecular orbital. The covalent bond

that is formed when the two 
satomic orbitals overlap is called a 
sigma bond. A bond is cylindrically symmetrical
Ñthe electrons in the bond are symmetrically dis-
tributed about an imaginary line connecting the centers of the two atoms joined by the

bond. (The term comes from the fact that cylindrically symmetrical molecular or-

bitals possess symmetry.)
Duringbond formation,energy is released as the two orbitals start to overlap,be-
cause the electron in each atom not only is attracted to its own nucleus but also is at-

tracted to the positively charged nucleus of the other atom (Figure1.2). Thus,the

attraction of the negatively charged electrons for the positively charged nuclei is what

holds the atoms together. The more the orbitals overlap,the more the energy decreases
HH1s atomicorbital1s atomicorbitalHHHHmolecular orbitalsss1S2(H2).0104 kcal/molPotential energy0.74 †Internuclear distancebond length104 kcal/mol
bonddissociation
energy hydrogenatoms are close
together hydrogenatoms are far
apartFigure 1.2
The change in energy that occurs astwo 1satomic orbitals approacheach other. The internuclear

distance at minimum energy is the
length of the covalent bond.
HHMovie:bond formationH2BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 20
Section 1.6An Introduction to Molecular Orbital Theory
21Maximum stability corresponds to mini-
mum energy.
*Joules are the Syst
‘me International (SI) units for energy,although many
chemists use calories. We will use both in this book.
1 kcal4.184 kJ.nucleusof the 
hydrogen
atomnodephase of the orbitalphase of the orbitalwaves reinforce each other, resulting 
in bondingwaves cancel 
each other, and
no bond formsdestructive combinationconstructive combinationFigure 1.3
The wave functions of twohydrogen atoms can interact to
reinforce, or enhance, each other
(top) or can interact to cancel each
other (bottom). Note that waves
that interact constructively are in-
phase, whereas waves that interact
destructively are out-of-phase.until the atoms approach each other so closely that their positively charged nuclei start
to repel each other. This repulsion causes a large increase in energy. We see that max-

imum stability (i.e.,minimum energy) is achieved when the nuclei are a certain dis-

tance apart. This distance is the 
bond lengthof the new covalent bond. The length of
the bond is 0.74 
As Figure1.2shows,energy is released when a covalent bond forms. When the
bond forms,(or 435 kJmol)*of energy is released. Breaking the
bond requires precisely the same amount of energy. Thus,the 
bond strength
Ñalsocalled the bond dissociation energy
Ñis the energy required to break a bond,or the
energy released when a bond is formed. Every covalent bond has a characteristic bond

length and bond strength.Orbitals are conserved
Ñthe number of molecular orbitals formed must equal the
number of atomic orbitals combined. In describing the formation of an bond,

however,we combined two atomic orbitals,but discussed only one molecular orbital.

Where is the other molecular orbital? It is there,but it contains no electrons.
Atomic orbitals can combine in two different ways:constructively and destructive-
ly. They can combine in a constructive,additive manner,just as two light waves or

sound waves may reinforce each other (Figure1.3). This is called a 
(sigma) bond-ing molecular orbital. Atomic orbitals can also combine in a destructive way,cancel-
ing each other. The cancellation is similar to the darkness that occurs when two light

waves cancel each other or to the silence that occurs when two sound waves cancel

each other (Figure1.3). This destructive type of interaction is called a 
antibondingmolecular orbital. An antibonding orbital is indicated by an asterisk 
*.S*SHH104 kcalmolHH†.HHThe bonding molecular orbital and antibonding molecular orbital are shown
in the molecular orbital diagram in Figure1.4. In an MO diagram,the energies are rep-

resented as horizontal lines; the bottom line is the lowest energy level,the top line the

highest energy level. We see that any electrons in the bonding orbital will most likely

be found between the nuclei. This increased electron density between the nuclei is

what binds the atoms together. Because there is a node between the nuclei in the anti-

bonding molecular orbital,any electrons that are in that orbital are more likely to be

found anywhere except between the nuclei,so the nuclei are more exposed to one an-

other and will be forced apart by electrostatic repulsion. Thus,electrons that occupy

this orbital detract from,rather than aid,the formation of a bond between the atoms.
s*sBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 21
22CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesThe MO diagram shows that the bonding molecular orbital is more stable
Ñis lower
in energy
Ñthan the individual atomic orbitals. This is because the more nuclei an
electron Òfeels,Óthe more stable it is. The antibonding molecular orbital,with less
electron density between the nuclei,is less stable
Ñis of higher energy
Ñthan the
atomic orbitals.After the MO diagram is constructed,the electrons are assigned to the molecular
orbitals. The aufbau principle and the Pauli exclusion principle,which apply to elec-

trons in atomic orbitals,also apply to electrons in molecular orbitals:Electrons always

occupy available orbitals with the lowest energy,and no more than two electrons can

occupy a molecular orbital. Thus,the two electrons of the bond occupy the

lower energy bonding molecular orbital (Figure 1.4),where they are attracted to both

positively charged nuclei. It is this electrostatic attraction that gives a covalent bond its

strength. Therefore,the greater the overlap of the atomic orbitals,the stronger is the

covalent bond. The strongest covalent bonds are formed by electrons that occupy the

molecular orbitals with the lowest energy.
The MO diagram in Figure 1.4allows us to predict that would not be as stable
as because has only one electron in the bonding orbital. We can also predict

that does not exist:Because each He atom would bring two electrons,would

have four electrons
Ñtwo filling the lower energy bonding molecular orbital and the
remaining two filling the higher energy antibonding molecular orbital. The two elec-

trons in the antibonding molecular orbital would cancel the advantage to bonding

gained by the two electrons in the bonding molecular orbital.
PROBLEM 13Predict whether or not exists.
Two 
patomic orbitals can overlap either end-on or side-to-side. Let
Õs first look at
end-on overlap. End-on overlap forms a bond. If the overlapping lobes of the 
por-bitals are in-phase (a blue lobe of one 
porbital overlaps a blue lobe of the other 
por-bital),a bonding molecular orbital is formed (Figure1.5). The electron density of

the bonding molecular orbital is concentrated between the nuclei,which causes the

back lobes (the nonoverlapping lobes) of the molecular orbital to be quite small. The 

bonding molecular orbital has two nodes
Ña nodal plane passing through each of the
nuclei.If the overlapping lobes of the 
porbitals are out-of-phase (a blue lobe of one 
por-bital overlaps a green lobe of the other 
porbital),a antibonding molecular orbital is
s*ssssHe2 He2He2H2 H2H2 HÑHWhen two atomic orbitals overlap, twomolecular orbitals are formed
Ñonelower in energy and one higher in ener-
gy than the atomic orbitals.In-phase overlap forms a bonding MO;out-of-phase overlap forms an anti-
bonding MO.antibonding molecular orbital bonding molecular orbital1s atomicorbital1s atomicorbitalEnergynodeFigure 1.4
Atomic orbitals of and molecular
orbitals of Before covalent bond

formation, each electron is in an
atomic orbital. After covalent bond
formation, both electrons are in the
bonding molecular orbital. The
antibonding molecular orbital is
empty.
H2.HBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 22
Section 1.6An Introduction to Molecular Orbital Theory
23nodesnodenode antibonding molecular orbital bonding molecular orbital2p atomicorbital2p atomicorbitalEnergyFigure 1.5
End-on overlap of two porbitals toform a bonding molecular orbital

and a antibonding molecular

orbital.s*sSide-to-side overlap of two patomic or-bitals forms a bond. All other cova-

lent bonds in organic molecules are 

bonds.SPformed. The antibonding molecular orbital has 
three
nodes. (Notice that after eachnode,the phase of the molecular orbital changes.)
Unlike the bond formed as a result of end-on overlap,side-to-side overlap of two
patomic orbitals forms a pibond
(Figure1.6). Side-to-side overlap of two in-
phase patomic orbitals forms a bonding molecular orbital,whereas side-to-side
overlap of two out-of-phase 
porbitals forms a antibonding molecular orbital. The
bonding molecular orbital has one node
Ña nodal plane that passes through both nu-
clei. The antibonding molecular orbital has two nodal planes. Notice that bonds

are cylindrically symmetrical,but bonds are not.
The extent of overlap is greater when 
porbitals overlap end-on than when they
overlap side-to-side. This means that a bond formed by the end-on overlap of 
por-bitals is stronger than a bond formed by the side-to-side overlap of 
porbitals. It alsomeans that a bonding molecular orbital is more stable than a bonding molecular

orbital because the stronger the bond,the more stable it is. Figure1.7shows a molec-

ular orbital diagram of two identical atoms using their three degenerate atomic orbitals

to form three bondsÑone bond and two bonds.
pspspspsp*pp*p1P2ss*A bond is stronger than a bond.
PS antibonding molecular orbital bonding molecular orbital2p atomicorbital2p atomicorbitalnodal planenodal planenodal planeEnergyFigure 1.6
Side-to-side overlap of two parallelporbitals to form a bonding
molecular orbital and a 
antibonding molecular orbital.p*pBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 23
24CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Basesp atomic orbitalof oxygenp atomic orbitalof carbon antibonding molecular orbital bonding molecular orbitalEnergyFigure 1.8
Side-to-side overlap of a porbital ofcarbon with a porbital of oxygento form a bonding molecular

orbital and a antibonding

molecular orbital.p*pNow let
Õs look at the molecular orbital diagram for side-to-side overlap of a 
por-bital of carbon with a porbital of oxygenÑthe orbitals are the same,but they belong
to different atoms (Figure1.8). When the two 
patomic orbitals combine to form mo-lecular orbitals,they do so unsymmetrically. The atomic orbital of the more electro-

negative atom contributes more to the bonding molecular orbital,and the atomic

orbital of the less electronegative atom contributes more to the antibonding molecular

orbital. This means that if we were to put electrons in the bonding MO,they would be

more apt to be around the oxygen atom than around the carbon atom. Thus,both the

Lewis theory and molecular orbital theory tell us that the electrons shared by carbon

and oxygen are not shared equallyÑthe oxygen atom of a carbon
Ðoxygen bond has a
partial negative charge and the carbon atom has a partial positive charge.
Organic chemists find that the information obtained from MO theory,where valence
electrons occupy bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals,does not always yield the

needed information about the bonds in a molecule. The 
valence-shell electron-pair
repulsion (VSEPR) model
combines the Lewis concept of shared electron pairs and
lone-pair electrons with the concept of atomic orbitals and adds a third principle:
theminimization of electron repulsion
. In this model,atoms share electrons by overlapping
pppppp
EnegryFigure 1.7
pOrbitals can overlap end-on toform bonding and 

antibonding molecular orbitals, or
can overlap side-to-side to form 
bonding and antibonding

molecular orbitals. The relative
energies of the molecular orbitals
are spp*s*.p*ps*sBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 24
Section 1.7Bonding in Methane and Ethane: Single Bonds
25their atomic orbitals,and because electron pairs repel each other,the bonding electrons
and lone-pair electrons around an atom are positioned as far apart as possible.
Because organic chemists generally think of chemical reactions in terms of the
changes that occur in the bonds of the reacting molecules,the VSEPR model often

provides the easiest way to visualize chemical change. However,the model is inade-

quate for some molecules because it does not allow for antibonding orbitals. We will

use both the MO and the VSEPR models in this book. Our choice will depend on

which model provides the best description of the molecule under discussion. We will

use the VSEPR model in Sections1.7
Ð1.13.PROBLEM 14Indicate the kind of molecular orbital that results when the orbitals are
combined as indicated:1.7Bonding in Methane and Ethane: Single BondsWe will begin the discussion of bonding in organic compounds by looking at the bond-
ing in methane,a compound with only one carbon atom. Then we will examine the

bonding in ethane (a compound with two carbons and a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond),in ethene (a compound with two carbons and a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond),and in
ethyne (a compound with two carbons and a carbon
Ðcarbon triple bond).Next,we will look at bonds formed by atoms other than carbon that are commonly
found in organic compounds
Ñbonds formed by oxygen,nitrogen,and the halogens.
Because the orbitals used in bond formation determine the bond angles in a molecule
,you will see that if we know the bond angles in a molecule,we can figure out which

orbitals are involved in bond formation.
Bonding in MethaneMethane has four covalent bonds. Because all four bonds have the same

length and all the bond angles are the same (109.5¡),we can conclude that the four
bonds in methane are identical.Four different ways to represent a methane molecule are shown here.
In a perspective formula,bonds in the plane of the paper are drawn as solid lines,
bonds protruding out of the plane of the paper toward the viewer are drawn as solid

wedges,and those protruding back from the plane of the paper away from the viewer

are drawn as hatched wedges.
CHCH(CH4)a.b.c.d.s, s*, p, or 
p*HC109.5perspective formulaof methaneball-and-stick modelof methanespace-filling modelof methaneelectrostatic potentialmap for methaneHHHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 25
26CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesThe potential map of methane shows that neither carbon nor hydrogen carries much
of a charge:There are neither red areas,representing partially negatively charged

atoms,nor blue areas,representing partially positively charged atoms. (Compare this

map with the potential map for water on p.14). The absence of partially charged atoms

can be explained by the similar electronegativities of carbon and hydrogen,which

cause carbon and hydrogen to share their bonding electrons relatively equally.

Methane is a nonpolar molecule.You may be surprised to learn that carbon forms four covalent bonds since you
know that carbon has only two unpaired electrons in its ground-state electronic con-

figuration (Table1.2). But if carbon were to form only two covalent bonds,it would

not complete its octet. Now we need to come up with an explanation that accounts for

carbonÕs forming four covalent bonds.
If one of the electrons in the 2sorbital were promoted into the empty 2patomic or-bital,the new electronic configuration would have four unpaired electrons; thus,four

covalent bonds could be formed. Let
Õs now see whether this is feasible energetically.
Because a porbital is higher in energy than an 
sorbital,promotion of an electron
from an sorbital to a porbital requires energy. The amount of energy required is
The formation of four bonds releases of energy be-
cause the bond dissociation energy of a single bond is If the

electron were not promoted,carbon could form only two covalent bonds,which would

release only So,by spending (or 402 kJmol) to promote

an electron,an extra (or 879 kJmol) is released. In other words,promo-

tion is energetically advantageous (Figure1.9).
210 kcalmol96 kcalmol210 kcalmol.105 kcalmol.CH420 kcalmolCH96 kcalmol.sppp
sppp
promotion
before promotionafter promotionLinus Carl Pauling (1901
Ð1994)was born in Portland,Oregon. A

friendÕs home chemistry laboratory
sparked Pauling
Õs early interest in
science. He received a Ph.D. from the

California Institute of Technology

and remained there for most of his

academic career. He received the

Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1954 for

his work on molecular structure. Like

Einstein,Pauling was a pacifist,win-

ning the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for

his work on behalf of nuclear
disarmament.Potential energypromotion96 kcal/mol420 kcal/mol4 covalentbondsFigure 1.9
As a result of electron promotion,carbon forms four covalent bonds
and releases 420 kcalmol of

energy. Without promotion, carbon

would form two covalent bonds
and release 210 kcalmol of energy.

Because it requires 96 kcalmol to

promote an electron, the overall
energy advantage of promotion is114 kcalmol.We have managed to account for the observation that carbon forms four covalent
bonds,but what accounts for the fact that the four bonds in methane are identi-

cal? Each has a bond length of 1.10 and breaking any one of the bonds requires the

same amount of energy (105 kcalmol,or 439 kJmol). If carbon used an 
sorbital andthree porbitals to form these four bonds,the bond formed with the 
sorbital would be
different from the three bonds formed with 
porbitals. How can carbon form four iden-
tical bonds,using one 
sand three porbitals? The answer is that carbon uses 
hybridorbitals.Hybrid orbitalsare mixed orbitals
Ñthey result from combining orbitals. The con-
cept of combining orbitals,called 
orbital hybridization
,was first proposed by Linus
Pauling in 1931. If the one 
sand three porbitals of the second shell are combined andthen apportioned into four equal orbitals,each of the four resulting orbitals will be one

part sand three parts p. This type of mixed orbital is called an (stated 
Òs-p-threeÓnot Òs-p-cubedÓ) orbital. (The superscript 3 means that three porbitals were mixed
sp3†,CHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 26
Section 1.7Bonding in Methane and Ethane: Single Bonds
27s orbitalthe s orbital adds tothe lobe of the p orbitalp orbitalthe s orbital subtracts fromthe lobe of the p orbitalFigure 1.10
The sorbital adds to one lobe ofthe porbital and subtracts from theother lobe of the porbital.psppsp3sp3sp3sp3hybridizationHHb.a.HHCCFigure 1.12
(a)The four orbitals are
directed toward the corners of a
tetrahedron, causing each bond
angle to be 109.5¡.(b)An orbital picture of methane,

showing the overlap of each 
orbital of carbon with the sorbital of a hydrogen. (For clarity,

the smaller lobes of the 
orbitals are not shown.)sp3sp3sp3with one 
sorbital to form the hybrid orbitals.) Each orbital has 25% 
scharacterand 75% pcharacter. The four orbitals are degenerate
Ñthey have the same energy.
Like a 
porbital,an orbital has two lobes. The lobes differ in size,however,be-
cause the sorbital adds to one lobe of the 
porbital and subtracts from the other lobe of
the porbital (Figure1.10). The stability of an orbital reflects its composition; it is
more stable than a porbital,but not as stable as an 
sorbital (Figure1.11). The larger
lobe of the orbital is used in covalent bond formation.
sp3sp3sp3ppp
ssp3sp3sp3sp3hybridization4 orbitals are hybridizedhybrid orbitalssp3sp3Figure 1.11
An sorbital and three porbitalshybridize to form four orbitals.

An orbital is more

stable than a porbital, but not asstable as an sorbital.sp3sp3The four orbitals arrange themselves in space in a way that allows them to get
as far away from each other as possible (Figure1.12a). This occurs because electrons

repel each other and getting as far from each other as possible minimizes the repulsion

(Section1.6). When four orbitals spread themselves into space as far from each other

as possible,they point toward the corners of a regular tetrahedron (a pyramid with four
sp3BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 27
28CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Basesfaces,each an equilateral triangle). Each of the four bonds in methane is
formed from overlap of an orbital of carbon with the 
sorbital of a hydrogen(Figure1.12b). This explains why the four bonds are identical.
The angle formed between any two bonds of methane is 109.5
¡. This bond angle is
called the tetrahedral bond angle. A carbon,such as the one in methane,that forms
covalent bonds using four equivalent orbitals is called a 
tetrahedral carbon.The postulation of hybrid orbitals may appear to be a theory contrived just to make
things fit
Ñand that is exactly what it is. Nevertheless,it is a theory that gives us a very
good picture of the bonding in organic compounds.
Noteto the student
It is important to understand what molecules look like in three dimensions. As you study
each chapter,make sure to visit the Web site www.prenhall.com/bruiceand look at the

three-dimensional representations of molecules that can be found in the molecule gallery

that accompanies the chapter.
Bonding in EthaneThe two carbon atoms in ethane are tetrahedral. Each carbon uses four orbitals to
form four covalent bonds:
One orbital of one carbon overlaps an orbital of the other carbon to form
the bond. Each of the remaining three orbitals of each carbon overlaps

the sorbital of a hydrogen to form a bond. Thus,the bond is
formedby overlap,and each bond is formed by overlap

(Figure1.13). 
Each of the bond angles in ethane is nearly the tetrahedral bond angle
of 109.5¡,and the length of the bond is 1.54 Ethane,like methane,is a
nonpolar molecule.†.CCsp3ÐCHsp3Ðsp3CCCHsp3CCsp3sp3CHHHCH
HHethanesp3sp3CHsp3CHHHHHHHHHHHHHCCCCElectron pairs spread themselves into
space as far from each other as possible.
Figure 1.13
An orbital picture of ethane. The bond is formed by overlap, and each 
bond is formed by overlap. (The smaller lobes of the orbitals are not shown.)
sp3sp3ÐsCHsp3Ðsp3CCperspective formulaof ethaneball-and-stick model of ethane1.54 A1.10 A109.6space-filling modelof ethaneelectrostatic potentialmap for ethaneCCHHHHHH3-D Molecule:MethaneBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 28
All the bonds in methane and ethane are sigma bonds because they are all
formed by the end-on overlap of atomic orbitals. All 
single bondsfound in organic
compounds are sigma bonds.PROBLEM 15What orbitals are used to form the 10 covalent bonds in propane 
The MO diagram illustrating the overlap of an orbital of one carbon with an 
orbital of another carbon (Figure1.14) is similar to the MO diagram for the end-on

overlap of two 
porbitals,which should not be surprising since orbitals have 75%
pcharacter.
sp3sp3sp3(CH3CH2CH3)?(s)Section 1.8Bonding in Ethene: A Double Bond
29 antibonding molecular orbital bonding molecular orbitalsp3 atomicorbitalsp3 atomicorbitalEnergyFigure 1.14
End-on overlap of two orbitals
to form a bonding molecular

orbital and a antibonding

molecular orbital.s*ssp3All single bonds found in organic com-pounds are sigma bonds.
3-D Molecule:Ethane1.8Bonding in Ethene: A Double BondEach of the carbon atoms in ethene (also called ethylene) forms four bonds,but each is
bonded to only three atoms:To bond to three atoms,each carbon hybridizes three atomic orbitals. Because three
orbitals (an sorbital and two of the 
porbitals) are hybridized,three hybrid orbitals are
obtained. These are called orbitals. After hybridization,each carbon atom has

three degenerate orbitals and one 
porbital:To minimize electron repulsion,the three orbitals need to get as far from each
other as possible. Therefore,the axes of the three orbitals lie in a plane,directed

toward the corners of an equilateral triangle with the carbon nucleus at the center. This

means that the bond angles are all close to 120
¡. Because the hybridized carbon
sp2sp2ppp
ssp2sp2psp2hybridizationthree orbitals are hybridizedhybrid orbitalssp2sp2CCHethene(ethylene)HHHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 29
30CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesHHHHH bond bond bond bonda.b.c.
HHHHCCCCbond formedby sp2Ðs overlapbond formed bysp2Ðsp2 overlapCCHHHatom is bonded to three atoms that define a plane,it is called a 
trigonal planar carbon
.The unhybridized porbital is perpendicular to the plane defined by the axes of the 
orbitals (Figure1.15).
Thecarbons in ethene form two bonds with each other. This is called a 
doublebond. The two carbon
Ðcarbon bonds in the double bond are not identical. One of the
bonds results from the overlap of an orbital of one carbon with an orbital of the

other carbon; this is a sigma bond because it is formed by end-on overlap

(Figure1.16a). Each carbon uses its other two orbitals to overlap the 
sorbital of ahydrogen to form the bonds. The second carbon
Ðcarbon bond results fromside-to-side overlap of the two unhybridized 
porbitals. Side-to-side overlap of 
por-bitals forms a pi bond (Figure 1.16b). Thus,one of the bonds in a double bond is a
bond and the other is a bond. All the bonds are bonds.
sCHps(p)CHsp2(s)sp2sp2sp2side viewtop view
p120sp2sp2sp2Figure 1.15
An hybridized carbon. The three
degenerate orbitals lie in a

plane. The unhybridized porbital isperpendicular to the plane. (The
smaller lobes of the orbitals are

not shown.)sp2sp2sp2Figure 1.16
(a)One bond in ethene is a bond formed by overlap, and the bonds
are formed by overlap.(b) The second bond is a bond formed by side-to-side

overlap of a porbital of one carbon with a porbital of the other carbon.(c) There is an
accumulation of electron density above and below the plane containing the two carbons
and four hydrogens.pCCsp2ÐsCHsp2Ðsp2sCC3-D Molecule:EtheneThe two 
porbitals that overlap to form the bond must be parallel to each other
for maximum overlap to occur. This forces the triangle formed by one carbon and

two hydrogens to lie in the same plane as the triangle formed by the other carbon

and two hydrogens. This means that all six atoms of ethene lie in the same plane,

and the electrons in the 
porbitals occupy a volume of space above and below the
plane (Figure 1.16c). The electrostatic potential map for ethene shows that it is a

nonpolar molecule with an accumulation of negative charge (the orange area) above

the two carbons. (If you could turn the potential map over,a similar accumulation of

negative charge would be found on the other side.)
p1.33 A1.08 A121.7116.6CCHHHHa double bond consists of one  bond and one  bondball-and-stick model of ethenespace-filling modelof etheneelectrostatic potential mapfor etheneBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 30
spspppFigure 1.17
An sphybridized carbon. The twosporbitals are oriented 180¡awayfrom each other, perpendicular to

the two unhybridized porbitals.(The smaller lobes of the sporbitalsare not shown.)Section 1.9Bonding in Ethyne: A Triple Bond
31DIAMOND, GRAPHITE, ANDBUCKMINSTERFULLERENE:
SUBSTANCES CONTAINING ONLY

CARBON ATOMS
Diamond is the hardest of all substances. Graphite,in contrast,
is a slippery,soft solid most familiar to us as the 
ÒleadÓin pen-
cils. Both materials,in spite of their very different physical

properties,contain only carbon atoms. The two substances dif-

fer solely in the nature of the carbon
Ðcarbon bonds holding
them together. Diamond consists of a rigid three-dimensional

network of atoms,with each carbon bonded to four other car-
bons via orbitals. The carbon atoms in graphite,on the other
hand,are hybridized,so each bonds to only three other car-

bon atoms. This trigonal planar arrangement causes the atoms in

graphite to lie in flat,layered sheets that can shear off of neigh-

boring sheets. You experience this when you write with a pencil:

Sheets of carbon atoms shear off,leaving a thin trail of graphite.

There is a third substance found in nature that contains only car-

bon atoms:buckminsterfullerene. Like graphite,buckminster-

fullerene contains only hybridized carbons,but instead of

forming planar sheets,the carbons in buckminsterfullerene

form spherical structures. (Buckminsterfullerene is discussed in

more detail in Section15.2.)
sp2sp2sp2sp3CCHHc.a.CCHHCCHHbond formed byspÐsp overlap bond formed byspÐs overlapb.180Figure 1.18
(a)The bond in ethyne is
formed by spÐspoverlap, and thebonds are formed by spÐsoverlap. The carbon atoms and the
atoms bonded to them are in a
straight line. (b)The two

carbonÐcarbon bonds are formed
by side-to-side overlap of the porbitals of one carbon with the porbitals of the other carbon.
(c)Electron density accumulates in 

a cylinder that wraps around the
egg-shaped molecule.pCHsCCFour electrons hold the carbons together in a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond; only two
electrons bind the atoms in a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond. This means that a carbon
Ðcarbondouble bond is stronger (152 kcalmol or 636 kJmol) and shorter (1.33 ) than a

carbonÐcarbon single bond (88 kcalmol or and 1.54 ).
†368 kJmol,†1.9Bonding in Ethyne: A Triple Bond
The carbon atoms in ethyne (also called acetylene) are each bonded to only two
atomsÑa hydrogen and another carbon:Because each carbon forms covalent bonds with two atoms,only two orbitals (an 
sand a p) are hybridized. Two degenerate 
sporbitals result. Each carbon atom in ethyne,
therefore,has two 
sporbitals and two unhybridized 
porbitals (Figure1.17).
One of the sporbitals of one carbon in ethyne overlaps an 
sporbital of the other car-bon to form a carbonÐcarbon bond. The other 
sporbital of each carbon overlaps the
sorbital of a hydrogen to form a bond (Figure1.18a). To minimize electron
sCHsspppp
spspphybridizationtwo orbitals are hybridizedhybrid orbitalsCCH
Hethyne(acetylene)BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 31
32CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Basesrepulsion,the two 
sporbitals point in opposite directions. Consequently,the bond an-
gles are 180¡.The two unhybridized 
porbitals are perpendicular to each other,and both are per-
pendicular to the sporbitals. Each of the unhybridized 
porbitals engages in side-to-side overlap with a parallel 
porbital on the other carbon,with the result that two 
bonds are formed (Figure 1.18b). The overall result is a triple bond. A 
triple bondconsists of one bond and two bonds. Because the two unhybridized 
porbitals oneach carbon are perpendicular to each other,there is a region of high electron density

above and below,
andin front of and in back of,the internuclear axis of the molecule
(Figure 1.18c). The potential map for ethyne shows that negative charge accumulates

in a cylinder that wraps around the egg-shaped molecule.
Because the two carbon atoms in a triple bond are held together by six electrons,a
triple bond is stronger (200 kcalmol or 837 kJmol) and shorter (1.20 ) than a

double bond.1.10Bonding in the Methyl Cation, the Methyl Radical, and the Methyl AnionNot all carbon atoms form four bonds. A carbon with a positive charge,a negative
charge,or an unpaired electron forms only three bonds. Now we will see what orbitals

carbon uses when it forms three bonds.The Methyl Cation The positively charged carbon in the methyl cation is bonded to three atoms,so it hy-

bridizes three orbitalsÑan sorbital and two 
porbitals. Therefore,it forms its three co-
valent bonds using orbitals. Its unhybridized 
porbital remains empty. The
positively charged carbon and the three atoms bonded to it lie in a plane. The 
porbitalstands perpendicular to the planeThe Methyl Radical The carbon atom in the methyl radical is also hybridized. The methyl radical dif-

fers by one unpaired electron from the methyl cation. That electron is in the 
porbital.Notice the similarity in the ball-and-stick models of the methyl cation and the methyl
radical. The potential maps,however,are quite different because of the additional

electron in the methyl radical.sp2(CH3)sp2(CH3)†pspHCHHmethyl cationCH3top viewball-and-stick models of the methyl cationelectrostatic potential map
for the methyl cationempty p orbitalbond formed bysp2Ðs overlapangled side view3-D Molecule:Ethynea triple bond consists of one bond and two  bondsball-and-stick model of ethynespace-filling model of ethyneelectrostatic potential mapfor ethyneCCHH1.20 A1.06 A180BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 32
Section 1.11Bonding in Water
33The bond angles in a molecule indicatewhich orbitals are used in bond

formation.The Methyl Anion The negatively charged carbon in the methyl anion has three pairs of bonding electrons
and one lone pair. The four pairs of electrons are farthest apart when the four orbitals

containing the bonding and lone-pair electrons point toward the corners of a tetra-

hedron. In other words,a negatively charged carbon is hybridized. In the methyl

anion,three of carbon
Õs orbitals each overlap the 
sorbital of a hydrogen,and the
fourth orbital holds the lone pair.
Take a moment to compare the potential maps for the methyl cation,the methyl radi-
cal,and the methyl anion.
1.11Bonding in Water
The oxygen atom in water forms two covalent bonds. Because oxygen has two
unpaired electrons in its ground-state electronic configuration (Table 1.2),it does not

need to promote an electron to form the number (two) of covalent bonds required to

achieve an outer shell of eight electrons (i.e.,to complete its octet). If we assume that

oxygen uses porbitals to form the two bonds,as predicted by oxygen
Õsground-state electronic configuration,we would expect a bond angle of about 90
¡be-cause the two 
porbitals are at right angles to each other. However,the experimentally
observed bond angle is 104.5
¡. How can we explain the observed bond angle? Oxygen
must use hybrid orbitals to form covalent bonds
Ñjust as carbon does. The 
sorbitaland the three porbitals must hybridize to produce four orbitals.
sp3ppp
sp3ssp3sp3hybridizationfour orbitals are hybridizedsecond-shell electrons
of oxygenhybrid orbitalssp3OH(H2O)sp3sp3sp3(CH3)methyl radicalCH3top viewball-and-stick models of the methyl radicalelectrostatic potential map
for the methyl radicalp orbital contains theunpaired electronbond formed bysp2Ðs overlapangled side viewCHHHHCHHmethyl anionCH3ball-and-stick model of the methyl anionelectrostatic potential map
for the methyl anionlone-pair electrons are in an sp3 orbitalbond formed bysp3-s overlapBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 33
34CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesEach of the two bonds is formed by the overlap of an orbital of oxygen
with the sorbital of a hydrogen. A lone pair occupies each of the two remaining 
orbitals.The bond angle in water is a little smaller (104.5
¡) than the tetrahedral bond angle
(109.5¡) in methane,presumably because each lone pair 
ÒfeelsÓonly one nucleus,
which makes the lone pair more diffuse than the bonding pair that 
ÒfeelsÓtwo nuclei
and is therefore relatively confined between them. Consequently,there is more elec-

tron repulsion between lone-pair electrons,causing the bonds to squeeze clos-

er together,thereby decreasing the bond angle.
Compare the potential map for water with that for methane. Water is a polar molecule;
methane is nonpolar.
PROBLEM 16The bond angles in are greater than __________ and less than __________.
1.12Bonding in Ammonia and in the Ammonium IonThe experimentally observed bond angles in are 107.3
¡. The bond angles indicate
that nitrogen also uses hybrid orbitals when it forms covalent bonds. Like carbon and

oxygen,the one 
sand three porbitals of the second shell of nitrogen hybridize to formfour degenerate orbitals:
The bonds in are formed from the overlap of an orbital of nitrogen
with the sorbital of a hydrogen. The single lone pair occupies an orbital. The bond
angle (107.3¡) is smaller than the tetrahedral bond angle (109.5
¡) because the electronsp3sp3NH3NHsp3ppp
sp3ssp3sp3hybridizationfour orbitals are hybridizedsecond-shell electrons
of nitrogen
hybrid orbitalssp3NH3H3OOHsp3sp3OHWATER
ÑA UNIQUE COMPOUNDWater is the most abundant compound found in
living organisms. Its unique properties have al-
lowed life to originate and evolve. Its high heat of fusion (the

heat required to convert a solid to a liquid) protects organisms

from freezing at low temperatures because a lot of heat must be

removed from water to freeze it. Its high heat capacity (the heat

required to raise the temperature of a substance a given amount)
minimizes temperature changes in organisms,and its high heat
of vaporization (the heat required to convert a liquid to a gas)

allows animals to cool themselves with a minimal loss of body

fluid. Because liquid water is denser than ice,ice formed on the

surface of water floats and insulates the water below. That is

why oceans and lakes don
Õt freeze from the bottom up. It is also
why plants and aquatic animals can survive when the ocean or

lake they live in freezes.
104.5waterH2Oball-and-stick model of waterelectrostatic potential map
for waterbond is formed by the overlapof an sp3 orbital of oxygen withthe s orbital of hydrogenlone-pair electrons are in an sp3 orbitalHHO3-D Molecule:Water
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 34
Section 1.13Bonding in the Hydrogen Halides
353-D Molecule:Ammoniarepulsion between the relatively diffuse lone pair and the bonding pairs is greater than
the electron repulsion between two bonding pairs. Notice that the bond angles in 

(107.3¡) are larger than the bond angles in (104.5
¡) because nitrogen has only
one lone pair,whereas oxygen has two lone pairs.
Because the ammonium ion has four identical bonds and no lone pairs,
all the bond angles are 109.5¡Ñjust like the bond angels in methane.
PROBLEM 17According to the potential map for the ammonium ion,which atom(s) is (are) most posi-
tively charged?
PROBLEM 18Compare the potential maps for methane,ammonia,and water. Which is the most polar

molecule? Which is the least polar?
1.13Bonding in the Hydrogen Halides
Fluorine,chlorine,bromine,and iodine are collectively known as the halogens. HF,
HCl,HBr,and HI are called hydrogen halides. Bond angles will not help us determine

the orbitals involved in a hydrogen halide bond,as they did with other molecules,be-

cause hydrogen halides have only one bond. We do know,however,that bonding elec-

trons and lone-pair electrons position themselves to minimize electron repulsion

(Section1.6). If the three lone pairs were in orbitals,they would be farther apart

than they would be if one pair resided in an 
sorbital and the other two pairs resided in
sp3electrostatic potentialmap for methaneelectrostatic potential mapfor ammoniaelectrostatic potential mapfor waterNH(NH4)H2ONH3HHHammoniaNH3ball-and-stick model of ammoniaelectrostatic potential map
for ammoniabond is formed by the overlapof an sp3 orbital of nitrogen withthe s orbital of hydrogenlone-pair electrons arein an sp3 orbitalN107.3HHHHammonium ionNH4ball-and-stick model of the ammonium ionelectrostatic potential map
for the ammonium ionN109.5BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 35
36CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesThe shorter the bond, the stronger it is.
porbitals. Therefore,we will assume that the hydrogen
Ðhalogen bond is formed by theoverlapof an orbital of the halogen with the 
sorbital of hydrogen.In the case of fluorine,the orbital used in bond formation belongs to the second
shell of electrons. In chlorine,the orbital belongs to the third shell of electrons. Be-

cause the average distance from the nucleus is greater for an electron in the third shell

than for an electron in the second shell,the average electron density is less in a or-

bital than in a orbital. This means that the electron density in the region where the

sorbital of hydrogen overlaps the orbital of the halogen decreases as the size of the
halogen increases(Figure 1.19).Therefore,the hydrogen
Ðhalogen bond becomes
longer and weaker as the size (atomic weight) of the halogen increases (Table1.6).
sp32sp33sp3sp3sp3Hhydrogen fluorideball-and-stick
model of hydrogen fluorideelectrostatic potential mapfor hydrogen fluorideFsp3The hybridization of a C, O, or N issp13the number of P bonds2.Table 1.6
Hydrogen
ÐHalogen Bond Lengths and Bond Strengths
Bond length(†)Bond strength
Hydrogen halidekcal/molkJ/mol
HF0.917136571
HCl1.2746103432
HBr1.414587366

HI1.609071298
HHHHFClBrIFigure 1.19
There is greater electron density inthe region of overlap of an sorbitalwith a orbital than in the

region of overlap of an sorbitalwith a orbital.
3sp32sp3overlap of an s orbitalwith a 2 sp3 orbitaloverlap of an s orbitalwith a 3 sp3 orbitalhydrogen iodidehydrogen bromidehydrogen chloridehydrogen fluoridePROBLEM 19a.Predict the relative lengths and strengths of the bonds in and 
b.Predict the relative lengths and strengths of the bonds in HF,HCl,and HBr.
1.14Summary: Orbital Hybridization, Bond Lengths, Bond Strengths, and Bond Angles
All single bonds are bonds. All double bonds are composed of one bond and one 
bond. All triple bonds are composed of one bond and two bonds. The easiest way

to determine the hybridization of a carbon,oxygen,or nitrogen atom is to look at the

number of bonds it forms:If it forms no bonds,it is hybridized; if it forms one
bond,it is hybridized; if it forms two bonds,it is 
sphybridized. The exceptions
are carbocations and carbon radicals,which are hybridized
Ñnot because they form
a bond,but because they have an empty or half-filled 
porbital (Section1.10).
psp2psp2psp3pppspssBr2.Cl2BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 36
Section 1.14Summary: Orbital Hybridization, Bond Lengths, Bond Strengths, and Bond Angles
37Table1.7Comparison of the Bond Angles and the Lengths and Strengths of the Carbon
ÐCarbon and CarbonÐHydrogen Bonds in Ethane, Ethene, and Ethyne
Length ofStrength of Length of Strength of 
Hybridization Bondbond bond bond bond 
Moleculeof carbonangles(
†)(†)109.5¡1.54903771.10101423
120¡1.331747201.08111466
sp180¡1.202319671.06131548
ethyneHCCHsp2etheneHHHHCCsp3CHHHCHHHethane(kJmol)(kcalmol)(kJmol)(kcalmol)CHCHCCCCA bond is weaker than a bond.
SPThe greater the electron density in the
region of orbital overlap, the stronger is

the bond.The more 
scharacter, the shorter and
stronger is the bond.
In comparing the lengths and strengths of carbonÐcarbon single,double,and triple
bonds,we see that the more bonds holding two carbon atoms together,the shorter and

stronger is the carbon
Ðcarbon bond(Table1.7). Triple bonds are shorter and stronger
than double bonds,which are shorter and stronger than single bonds.
A double bond (a bond plus a bond) is stronger than a single bond (a bond),
but it is not twice as strong. We can conclude,therefore,that a bond is weaker than

a bond. This is what we would expect,because the end-on overlap that forms 

bonds is better than the side-to-side overlap that forms bonds (Section1.6).
The data in Table 1.7indicate that a bond is shorter and stronger than a
bond. This is because the 
sorbital of hydrogen is closer to the nucleus thanisthe orbital of carbon. Consequently,the nuclei are closer together in a bond

formed by overlap than they are in a bond formed by overlap. In addi-

tion to being shorter,a bond is stronger than a bond because there is

greater electron density in the region of overlap of an orbital with the 
sorbitalthanin the region of overlap of an orbital with an orbital.
The length and strength of a bond depend on the hybridization of the carbon
atom to which the hydrogen is attached. The more 
scharacter in the orbital used bycarbon to form the bond,the shorter and stronger is the bond
Ñagain,because an 
sorbital is closer to the nucleus than is a porbital. So a bond formed by an 
sphy-bridized carbon (50% s) is shorter and stronger than a bond formed by an 
hybridized carbon (33.3% s),which in turn is shorter and stronger than a bond
formed by an hybridized carbon (25% 
s).The bond angle also depends on the orbital used by carbon to form the bond. The
greater the amount of scharacter in the orbital,the larger is the bond angle. For exam-
ple,sphybridized carbons have bond angles of 180
¡,hybridized carbons have
bond angles of 120¡,and hybridized carbons have bond angles of 109.5
¡.sp3sp2sp3CHsp2CHCHCHsp3sp3sp3CCCHsp3Ðsp3sp3Ðsp3sCCsCHpsspspsThe more 
scharacter, the larger is the
bond angle.sp2OCCH3OHCNCH3OHCH3NH2NNH
2CCO
OCH3CH3CH3spsp2sp3sp2sp2sp3sp3sp3spspsp3sp3sp2sp2sp3sp3sp3BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 37
38CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesYou may wonder how an electron 
Òknows
Ówhat orbital it should go into. In fact,
electrons know nothing about orbitals. They simply arrange themselves around atoms

in the most stable manner possible. It is chemists who use the concept of orbitals to ex-

plain this arrangement.PROBLEM 20Which of the bonds of a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond has more effective orbital
Ðorbitaloverlap,the bond or the bond?
PROBLEM 21Why would you expect a bond formed by overlap to be stronger than a
bond formed by overlap?
PROBLEM 22a.What is the hybridization of each of the carbon atoms in the following compound?
b.What is the hybridization of each of the carbon,oxygen,and nitrogen atoms in the fol-
lowing compounds?
PROBLEM 23Describe the orbitals used in bonding and the bond angles in the following compounds.

(Hint:see Table 1.7).
a.b.c.d.e.HCOOHf.
1.15Dipole Moments of MoleculesIn Section1.3,we saw that for molecules with one covalent bond,the dipole moment
of the bond is identical to the dipole moment of the molecule. For molecules that have

more than one covalent bond,the geometry of the molecule must be taken into account

because both the magnitude
and the direction
of the individual bond dipole moments
(the vector sum) determine the overall dipole moment of the molecule. Symmetrical

molecules,therefore,have no dipole moment. For example,let
Õs look at the dipole
moment of carbon dioxide Because the carbon atom is bonded to two atoms,it

uses sporbitals to form the bonds. The remaining two 
porbitals on carbonform the two bonds. The individual carbon
Ðoxygen bond dipole momentscancel each otherÑbecause sporbitals form a bond angle of 180
¡Ñgiving carbon
dioxide a dipole moment of zero D. Another symmetrical molecule is carbon tetra-

chloride The four atoms bonded to the hybridized carbon atom are identi-

cal and project symmetrically out from the carbon atom. Thus,as with the

symmetry of the molecule causes the bond dipole moments to cancel. Methane also

has no dipole moment.CO2,sp3(CCl4).pCOsCO(CO2).N2CO2CCl4BH3BeH2NNNCCNCOCOCH3CH2OHCHHCC
OCCHOOHHOH3CCH3CHcaffeineOvitamin CCH3CHCH2CCCH
3CH3CHCHsp3Ðsp3ssp2Ðsp2sCCpsBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 38
Section 1.16An Introduction to Acids and Bases
39Born in Denmark,Johannes
Nicolaus Br¿nsted (1879Ð1947)studied engineering before he

switched to chemistry. He was a pro-

fessor of chemistry at the University

of Copenhagen. During World War II,

he became known for his anti-Nazi
position,and in 1947 he was elected

to the Danish parliament. He died
before he could take his seat.
The dipole moment of chloromethane is greater (1.87 D) than the dipole
moment of the bond (1.5D) because the dipoles are oriented so that

they reinforce the dipole of the bond
Ñthey are all in the same relative direc-
tion. The dipole moment of water (1.85D) is greater than the dipole moment of a sin-

gle bond (1.5D) because the dipoles of the two bonds reinforce each

other. The lone-pair electrons also contribute to the dipole moment. Similarly,the di-

pole moment of ammonia (1.47D) is greater than the dipole moment of a single
bond (1.3D).
PROBLEM 24Account for the difference in the shape and color of the potential maps for ammonia and
the ammonium ion in Section1.12.
PROBLEM 25Which of the following molecules would you expect to have a dipole moment of zero? To

answer parts g and h,you may need to consult your answers to Problem 23 a and b.
a.c.e.g.
b.d.f.h.
1.16An Introduction to Acids and Bases
Early chemists called any compound that tasted sour an acid (from 
acidus,Latin for
ÒsourÓ). Some familiar acids are citric acid (found in lemons and other citrus fruits),
acetic acid (found in vinegar),and hydrochloric acid (found in stomach acid
Ñthe sourtaste associated with vomiting). Compounds that neutralize acids,such as wood ashes

and other plant ashes,were called bases,or alkaline compounds (
ÒashÓin Arabic is 
alkalai). Glass cleaners and solutions designed to unclog drains are alkaline solutions.
The definitions of 
ÒacidÓand ÒbaseÓthat we use now were provided by Br
¿nstedand Lowry in 1923. In the Br
¿nstedÐLowry definitions,an 
acidis a species that do-
nates a proton,and a 
baseis a species that accepts a proton. (Remember that positive-
ly charged hydrogen ions are also called protons.) In the following reaction,hydrogen

chloride (HCl) meets the Br¿nstedÐLowry definition of an acid because it donates a
proton to water. Water meets the definition of a base because it accepts a proton from

HCl. Water can accept a proton because it has two lone pairs. Either lone pair can form

a covalent bond with a proton. In the reverse reaction,is an acid because it do-

nates a proton to and is a base because it accepts a proton from H
3O.ClCl,H3OBF3H2CCHBrNH3H2COBeCl2H2CCH2CH2Cl2CH3CH3HHClCHHHHHHOchloromethane 1.87 Dwater 1.85 Dammonia 1.47 DNNHOHOHCClCHCCl(CH3Cl)CCClClClClcarbon dioxide0 Dcarbon tetrachloride0 DOOThomas M. Lowry (1874
Ð1936)was born in England,the son of an

army chaplain. He earned a Ph.D. at

Central Technical College,London

(now Imperial College). He was head

of chemistry at Westminster Training

College and,later,at Guy
Õs Hospitalin London. In 1920,he became a

professor of chemistry at Cambridge

University.
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 39
40CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesAccording to the Br
¿nstedÐLowry definitions,any species that has a hydrogen can
potentially act as an acid,and any compound possessing a lone pair can potentially act

as a base. Both an acid and a base must be present in a 
proton-transfer reaction
,be-
cause an acid cannot donate a proton unless a base is present to accept it. 
AcidÐbasereactions
are often called proton-transfer reactions
.When a compound loses a proton,the resulting species is called its 
conjugate base.Thus,is the conjugate base of HCl,and is the conjugate base of When

a compound accepts a proton,the resulting species is called its 
conjugate acid. Thus,HCl is the conjugate acid of and is the conjugate acid of 
In a reaction involving ammonia and water,ammonia is a base because it ac-
cepts a proton,and water is an acid because it donates a proton. Thus,is the con-

jugate base of and is the conjugate acid of In the reverse

reaction,ammonium ion is an acid because it donates a proton,and hydroxide

ion is a base because it accepts a proton.
Notice that water can behave as either an acid or a base. It can behave as an acid be-
cause it has a proton that it can donate,but it can also behave as a base because it has a

lone pair that can accept a proton. In Section1.17,we will see how we know that water

acts as a base in the first reaction in this section and acts as an acid in the second reaction.
Acidityis a measure of the tendency of a compound to give up a proton. 
Basicityisa measure of a compoundÕs affinity for a proton. A strong acid is one that has a strong
tendency to give up its proton. This means that its conjugate base must be weak be-

cause it has little affinity for the proton. A weak acid has little tendency to give up its

proton,indicating that its conjugate base is strong because it has a high affinity for the

proton. Thus,the following important relationship exists between an acid and its con-

jugate base:The stronger the acid,the weaker is its conjugate base
. For example,since
HBr is a stronger acid than HCl,we know that is a weaker base than 
PROBLEM 26a.Draw the conjugate acid of each of the following:
1.2.3.4.
b.Draw the conjugate base of each of the following:
1.2.HBr3.4.
PROBLEM 27a.Write an equation showing reacting as an acid with and an equation
showing it reacting as a base with HCl.
b.Write an equation showing reacting as an acid with and an equation showing
it reacting as a base with HBr.
1.17Organic Acids and Bases; and pH
When a strong acid such as hydrogen chloride is dissolved in water,almost all the
molecules dissociate (break into ions),which means that products are favored at equi-

librium. When a much weaker acid,such as acetic acid,is dissolved in water,very few

molecules dissociate,so reactants are favored at equilibrium. Two half-headed arrows

are used to designate equilibrium reactions. A longer arrow is drawn toward the

species favored at equilibrium.
pKaHONH3NH3CH3OHH2OHNO3NH3H2OHOClNH3Cl.BrNH3a baseH2Oan acidHO a baseNH4an acid(HO)(NH4)(NH3).(NH4)H2O,HO(NH3)H2O.H3OCl,H3O.H2OClHClan acidH2Oa baseH3Oan acidCl 
a baseThe stronger the acid, the weaker is its
conjugate base.BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 40
Section 1.17Organic Acids and Bases; and pH
41pKaWhether a reversible reaction favors reactants or products at equilibrium is indicat-
ed by the equilibrium constantof the reaction,Remember that brackets are used
to indicate concentration in moles/liter [i.e.,molarity (M)].
The degree to which an acid (HA) dissociates is normally determined in a dilute so-
lution,so the concentration of water remains nearly constant. The equilibrium expres-

sion,therefore,can be rewritten using a new constant called the 
acid dissociationconstant,The acid dissociation constant is the equilibrium constant multiplied by the molar
concentration of water (55.5 M).
The larger the acid dissociation constant,the stronger is the acid
Ñthat is,the
greater is its tendency to give up a proton. Hydrogen chloride,with an acid dissocia-

tion constant of is a stronger acid than acetic acid,with an acid dissociation con-

stant of only For convenience,the strength of an acid is generally

indicated by its value rather than its value,where
The of hydrogen chloride is and the of acetic acid,a much weaker acid,is
4.76. Notice that the smaller the the stronger is the acid.
very strong acids
moderately strong acids

weak acids
extremely weak acids
Unless otherwise stated,the values given in this text indicate the strength of the
acid in water. Later (in Section10.10),you will see how the of an acid is affected
when the solvent is changed.
The pHof a solution indicates the concentration of positively charged hydrogen ions
in the solution. The concentration can be indicated as or,because a hydrogen ion

in water is solvated,as The lower the pH,the more acidic is the solution.
Acidic solutions have pH values less than 7; basic solutions have pH values greater
than 7. The pH values of some commonly encountered solutions are shown in the mar-

gin. The pH of a solution can be changed simply by adding acid or base to the solution.
pHlog [H3O][H3O].[H]papapa15pa5Ð15pa1Ð5pa1pa,pa7papalog aapKa1.74105.107,a[H3O][A][HA]eq[H2O]Ka.eq[H3O][A][H2O][HA]HAH2OH3OAeq.HClhydrogenchlorideH2OClH3OH3Oacetic acidH2OOCH3COHOCH3COThe stronger the acid, the smaller is its
pKa  .NaOH, 0.1MHousehold bleach
Household ammoniaBoraxTomatoesWineCoffeeSolutionpH
Cola, vinegarLemon juiceGastric juiceBaking sodaEgg white, seawater
Human blood, tears
Milk1413
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0Milk of magnesiaSalivaRainBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 41
42CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesDo not confuse pH and The pH scale is used to describe the acidity of a 
solution;the is characteristic of a particular 
compound,much like a melting point or a boil-
ing pointÑit indicates the tendency of the compound to give up its proton.
PROBLEM 28a.Which is a stronger acid,one with a of 5.2 or one with a of 5.8?
b.Which is a stronger acid,one with an acid dissociation constant of or one
with an acid dissociation constant of PROBLEM 29An acid has a of in water. What is its 
The importance of organic acids and bases will become clear when we discuss how
and why organic compounds react. The most common organic acids are carboxylic

acidsÑcompounds that have a COOH group. Acetic acid and formic acid are exam-
ples of carboxylic acids. Carboxylic acids have values ranging from about 3 to 5.

(They are moderately strong acids.) The values of a wide variety of organic com-

pounds are given in Appendix II.
AlcoholsÑcompounds that have an OH group
Ñare much weaker organic acids,
with values close to 16. Methanol and ethanol are examples of alcohols.
We have seen that water can behave both as an acid and as a base. An alcohol behaves
similarly:It can behave as an acid and donate a proton,or as a base and accept a

proton.A carboxylic acid can behave as an acid and donate a proton,or as a base and accept a
proton.H2OHOH2OH3Oa basean acid+OHCH3COÐOCH3COHOCH3COHCH3COHOCH3OH2OCH3OHan acidHOCH3OHH
2OCH3OHa baseH3OCH3OHmethanolpKa  15.5CH3CH2OHethanolpKa  15.9paacetic acidpKa  4.76formic acidpKa  3.75CH3COHOHCOHOpapaeq  ? ([H2O]55.5 M)4.53106a2.1104?3.4103papapapa  :BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 42
Section 1.17Organic Acids and Bases; and pH
43pKaA protonated
compound is a compound that has gained an additional proton. A pro-
tonated alcohol or a protonated carboxylic acid is a very strong acid. For example,

protonated methanol has a of protonated ethanol has a of and

protonated acetic acid has a of 
An amine can behave as an acid and donate a proton,or as a base and accept a proton.
Compounds with groups are amines.
Amines,however,have such high values that they rarely behave as acids. Ammo-
nia also has a high Amines are much more likely to act as bases. In fact,amines are the most common or-
ganic bases. Instead of talking about the strength of a base in terms of its value,it

is easier to talk about the strength of its conjugate acid as indicated by its value,

remembering that the stronger the acid,the weaker is its conjugate base. For example,

protonated methylamine is a stronger acid than protonated ethylamine,which means

that methylamine is a weaker base than ethylamine. Notice that the values of pro-

tonated amines are about 10 to 11.It is important to know the approximate values of the various classes of com-
pounds we have discussed. An easy way to remember them is in units of five,as shown

inTable1.8. (R is used when the particular carboxylic acid or amine is not specified.)
paprotonated methylaminepKa  10.7protonated ethylaminepKa  11.0CH3NH3CH3CH2NH3papapbmethylaminepKa  40CH3NH2ammoniapKa  36NH3pa.paCH3NHH
2OCH3NH2an acidHOCH3NH3H2OCH3NH2a baseH3ONH2protonated methanolpKa  2.5protonated ethanolpKa  2.4protonated acetic acidpKa  6.1CH3OHCH3CH2OHCH3COH+OH6.1.pa2.4,pa2.5,paTable 1.8
Approximate pKa Values
pKa0pKa~5p
Ka~10p
Ka~15
RNH3ROH
H2OROH2R+OHH3O+protonatedwatera protonatedcarboxylic acida protonatedalcohola carboxylic acida protonated aminean alcoholwaterCOHROCOHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 43
44CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesProtonated alcohols,protonated carboxylic acids,and protonated water have val-
ues less than 0,carboxylic acids have values of about 5,protonated amines have
values of about 10,and alcohols and water have values of about 15. These
values are also listed inside the back cover of this book for easy reference.
Now let
Õs see how we knew that water acts as a base in the first reaction in
Section1.16and as an acid in the second reaction. To determine which of the reactants

will be the acid,we need to compare their values:The of hydrogen chloride

is and the of water is 15.7. Because hydrogen chloride is the stronger acid,it

will donate a proton to water. Water,therefore,is a base in this reaction. When we

compare the values of the two reactants of the second reaction,we see that the
of ammonia is 36 and the of water is 15.7. In this case,water is the stronger
acid,so it donates a proton to ammonia. Water,therefore,is an acid in this reaction.
In determining the position of equilibrium for an acid
Ðbase reaction (i.e.,whether
reactants or products are favored at equilibrium),remember that the equilibrium favors

reaction
of the strong acid and strong base and formationof the weak acid and weakbase. In other words,
strong reacts to give weak
. Thus,the equilibrium lies away from
the stronger acid and toward the weaker acid.
PROBLEM 30a.For each of the acid
Ðbase reactions in Section1.17,compare the values of the acids
on either side of the equilibrium arrows and convince yourself that the position of equi-

librium is in the direction indicated. (The values you need can be found in

Section1.17or in Problem 31.
b.Do the same thing for the equilibria in Section1.16. (The of is 9.4.)
The precise value of the equilibrium constant can be calculated by dividing the 
of the reactant acid by the of the product acid. 
Thus,the equilibrium constant for the reaction of acetic acid with ammonia is
and the equilibrium constant for the reaction of ethanol with methylamine
is The calculations are as follows:
reaction of acetic acid with ammonia:reaction of ethanol with methylamine:eq1015.91010.7105.26.3106eq104.8109.4104.64.01046.3106.4.0104,eqa  reactant acida  product acidaaNH4papapastronger acidpKa  4.8stronger baseNH3weaker baseweaker acidpKa  9.4NH4CH3CH2OHweaker acidpKa  15.9weaker baseCH3NH2CH3CH2Ostronger basestronger acidpKa  10.7CH3NH3CH3COHOCH3COÐOpapapapa7papapapapapaStrong reacts to give weak.
Be sure to learn the approximate
pKavalues given in Table1.8.
Tutorial:
AcidÐbase reactionBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 44
Section 1.18The Effect of Structure on 
45pKaThe weaker the base, the stronger is its
conjugate acid.Stable bases are weak bases.
The more stable the base, the stronger is
its conjugate acid.PROBLEM 31a.Which is a stronger base,or (The of is 4.8; the
of HCOOH is 3.8.)b.Which is a stronger base,or (The of is 15.7; the of 
is36.)
c.Which is a stronger base,or (The of is the of
is )PROBLEM 32Using the values in Section1.17,rank the following species in order of decreasing

base strength:PROBLEM 33Calculate the equilibrium constant for the acidÐbase reactions between the following pairs
of reactants.a.c.
b.d.
1.18The Effect of Structure on 
The strength of an acid is determined by the stability of the conjugate base that isformed when the acid gives up its proton. The more stable the base,the stronger is its

conjugate acid. A stable base is a base that readily bears the electrons it formerly

shared with a proton. In other words,stable bases are weak bases
Ñthey don
Õt sharetheir electrons well. So we can say,
the weaker the base,the stronger is its conjugate
acid,or 
the more stable the base,the stronger is its conjugate acid
.The elements in the second row of the periodic table are all about the same size,but
they have very different electronegativities. The electronegativities increase across the

row from left to right. Of the atoms shown,carbon is the least and fluorine is the most

electronegative.
If we look at the bases formed when hydrogens are attached to these elements,we see
that the stabilities of the bases also increase from left to right because the more elec-

tronegative atom is better able to bear its negative charge.
The stronger acid is the acid that forms the more stable conjugate base,so HF is the
strongest acid and methane is the weakest acid(Table1.9).
CH4NH4H2OHF
relative acidities:strongestacid
ÐCH3ÐNH2HOÐFÐrelative stabilities:moststableCNOFrelative electronegativities:mostelectronegativepKaCH3NH3H2OCH3COOHH2OCH3NH2H2OHClH2OCH3NH2CH3NHCH3OCH3COCH3OHOpa2.5.CH3OH2 pa1.7;H3OpaCH3OH?H2ONH3paH2OpaNH2  ?HOpaCH3COOHpaHCOO?CH3COOBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 45
46CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesTable1.9The Values of Some Simple Acids
pKaHFHClHBrHIpa10pa9pa7pa7.0H2Spa3.2pa15.7pa36pa50H2ONH3CH4We therefore can conclude that when the atoms are similar in size,the more acidic
compound will have its hydrogen attached to the more electronegative atom.
The effect that the electronegativity of the atom bonded to a hydrogen has on the
acidity of that hydrogen can be appreciated when the values of alcohols and

amines are compared. Because oxygen is more electronegative than nitrogen,an alco-

hol is more acidic than an amine.Similarly,a protonated alcohol is more acidic than a protonated amine.
In comparing atoms that are very different in size,the 
sizeof the atom is more im-
portant than its electronegativity
in determining how well it bears its negative charge.
For example,as we proceed down a column in the periodic table,the elements get

larger and their electronegativity 
decreases
,but the stability of the base increases,so
the strength of the conjugate acid 
increases
. Thus,HI is the strongest acid of the hy-
drogen halides,even though iodine is the least electronegative of the halogens.
Why does the size of an atom have such a significant effect on the stability of the
base and,therefore,on the acidity of a hydrogen attached to it? The valence electrons of
are in a orbital,the valence electrons of are in a orbital,those of 
are in a orbital,and those of are in a orbital. The volume of space occupied

by a orbital is significantly greater than the volume of space occupied by a 

orbital because a orbital extends out farther from the nucleus. Because its negative

charge is spread over a larger volume of space,is more stable than F
.Cl3sp32sp33sp35sp3I4sp3Br3sp3Cl2sp3FHFHClHBrHI
relative acidities:strongestacidFÐClÐBrÐIÐrelative stabilities:most
stableFClBrI
relative electronegativities:largestmost
electronegative

CH3OH2pKa  2.5CH3NH3pKa  10.7protonated methanolprotonated methylamine
CH3OHpKa  15.5methanolCH3NH2pKa  40methylaminepaWhen atoms are very different in size,
the stronger acid will have its proton at-

tached to the largest atom.When atoms are similar in size, the
stronger acid will have its proton at-

tached to the more electronegative

atom.BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 46
Section 1.18The Effect of Structure on 
47pKaThus,as the halide ion increases in size,its stability increases because its negative
charge is spread over a larger volume of space
Ñits electron density decreases. There-
fore,HI is the strongest acid of the hydrogen halides because is the most stable

halide ion,even though iodine is the least electronegative of the halogens (Table1.9).

The potential maps illustrate the large difference in size of the halide ions:
In summary,as we move across a row of the periodic table,the orbitals have ap-
proximately the same volume,so it is the electronegativity of the element that deter-

mines the stability of the base and,therefore,the acidity of a proton bonded to that

base. As we move down a column of the periodic table,the volume of the orbitals in-

creases. The increase in volume causes the electron density of the orbital to decrease.

The electron density of the orbital is more important than electronegativity in deter-

mining the stability of the base and,therefore,the acidity of its conjugate acid. That is,

the lower the electron density,the more stable is the conjugate base and the stronger is

its conjugate acid.Although the acidic proton of each of the following five carboxylic acids is attached
to an oxygen atom,the five compounds have different acidities:
This difference indicates that there must be a factor
Ñother than the nature of the atomto which the hydrogen is bondedÑthat affects acidity.
From the values of the five carboxylic acids,we see that replacing one of the
hydrogen atoms of the group with a halogen atom affects the acidity of the com-

pound. (Chemists call this substitution,and the new atom is called a 
substituent.) Allthe halogens are more electronegative than hydrogen (Table1.3). An electronegative

halogen atom pulls the bonding electrons towards itself. Pulling electrons through

sigma bonds is called 
inductive electron withdrawal
. If we look at the conjugate
base of a carboxylic acid,we see that inductive electron withdrawal will stabilize it by

decreasing the electron density
about the oxygen atom. Stabilizing a base increases the
acidity of its conjugate acid.As the values of the five carboxylic acids show,inductive electron withdrawal in-
creases the acidity of a compound. The greater the electron-withdrawing ability (elec-

tronegativity) of the halogen substituent,the more the acidity is increased because the

more its conjugate base is stabilized.paCOÐOHHCBrinductive electron withdrawalsCH3paHFHClHBrHI
IpKa  4.76p
Ka  3.15p
Ka  2.86pKa  2.81p
Ka  2.66ICH2BrCH2ClCH2FCH2COHOCOHOCOHOCOHOCH3COHOBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 47
48CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesThe effect of a substituent on the acidity of a compound decreases as the distance
between the substituent and the oxygen atom increases.PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
a.Which is a stronger acid?
When you are asked to compare two items,pay attention to how they differ; ignore
where they are the same. These two compounds differ only in the halogen atom that is

attached to the middle carbon of the molecule. Because fluorine is more electronegative

than bromine,there is greater electron withdrawal from the oxygen atom in the fluori-

nated compound. The fluorinated compound,therefore,will have the more stable con-

jugate base,so it will be the stronger acid.
b.Which is a stronger acid?
These two compounds differ in the location of one of the chlorine atoms. Because the
chlorine in the compound on the left is closer to the bond than is the chlorine in

the compound on the right,the chlorine is more effective at withdrawing electrons from

the oxygen atom. Thus,the compound on the left will have the more stable conjugate

base,so it will be the stronger acid.
Now continue on to Problem 34.
PROBLEM 34For each of the following compounds,indicate which is the stronger acid:
a.or
b.c.or
d.PROBLEM 35List the following compounds in order of decreasing acidity:
CH3CH2CH2OHCH3CHCH2OHFCH3CHCH2OHClCH2CH2CH2OHClCH3CCH2OHCH
3CH2COHorOOCH3CH2OCH2CH2OHCH3OCH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2NH3CH3CH2CH2OH2orCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3OCH2CH2OHOHCH2CHCH2OHorClClCH3CCH2OHClClCH3CHCH2OHFCH3CHCH2OHorBrCH3CH2CH2pKa  2.97BrCH3CH2CHpKa  4.01BrCH3CHCH2pKa  4.59BrCH2CH2CH2pKa  4.71BrCHCH2CH2CH2COHOCOHOCOHOCOHOBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 48
Section 1.19An Introduction to Delocalized Electrons and Resonance
49PROBLEM 36For each of the following compounds,indicate which is the stronger base:
PROBLEM 37SOLVED
HCl is a weaker acid than HBr. Why,then,is a stronger acid than
SOLUTIONTo compare the acidities of HCl and HBr,we need to compare the stabili-
ties of and Because we know that size is more important than electronegativity in

determining stability,we know that is more stable than Therefore,HBr is a

stronger acid than HCl. In comparing the acidities of the two carboxylic acids,we need to

compare the stabilities of and (An OH bond is broken in both com-

pounds.) Therefore,the only factor to be considered is the electronegativities of the atoms

that are pulling electrons away from the oxygen atom in the conjugate bases. Because Cl is

more electronegative than Br,Cl is better at inductive electron withdrawal. Thus,it is bet-

ter at stabilizing the base that is formed when the proton leaves.
PROBLEM 38a.Which of the halide ions is the strongest base?
b.Which is the weakest base?
PROBLEM 39a.Which is more electronegative,oxygen or sulfur?

b.Which is a stronger acid,or 

c.Which is a stronger acid,or 
PROBLEM 40Using the table of values given in Appendix II,answer the following:
a.Which is the most acidic organic compound in the table?
b.Which is the least acidic organic compound in the table?

c.Which is the most acidic carboxylic acid in the table?

d.Which is more electronegative,an hybridized oxygen or an hybridized oxygen?
(Hint:Pick a compound in Appendix II with a hydrogen attached to an oxygen and
one with a hydrogen attached to an oxygen,and compare their values.)
e.What are the relative electronegativities of and 
sphybridized nitrogen atoms?f.What are the relative electronegativities of and 
sphybridized carbon atoms?g.Which is more acidic,or Why?
1.19An Introduction to Delocalized Electrons 
and ResonanceWe have seen that a carboxylic acid has a of about 5,whereas the of an alco-
hol is about 15. Because a carboxylic acid is a much stronger acid than an alcohol,we

know that a carboxylic acid has a considerably more stable conjugate base.
papaHNO2  ?HNO3sp3, sp2,sp3, sp2,pasp3sp2sp2sp3paCH3SH?CH3OHH2S?H2O(F, Cl, Br, I)RCOO.RCOOCl.BrBr.ClBrCH2COOH?ClCH2COOHCH3CHCOÐCH3CHCOÐorOOCH3CCH2CH2OÐCH3CH2CCH2OÐorOOBrFCH3CHCH2COÐCH3CH2CHCOÐorOOClClBrCH2COÐCH3CH2COÐorOOa.c.b.d.BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 49
50CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Bases3-D Molecules:Acetate ion; Ethoxide ionThere are two factors that cause the conjugate base of a carboxylic acid to be more
stable than the conjugate base of an alcohol. First,a carboxylate ion has a doubly

bonded oxygen in place of two hydrogens of the alkoxide ion. Inductive electron with-

drawal by this electronegative oxygen decreases the electron density of the ion. Sec-

ond,the electron density is further decreased by 
electron delocalization
.When an alcohol loses a proton,the negative charge resides on its single oxygen
atomÑthe electrons are localized. In contrast,when a carboxylic acid loses a proton,the
negative charge is shared by both oxygen atoms because the electrons are 
delocalized.Delocalized electrons
do not belong to a single atom,nor are they confined to a bond
between two atoms. Delocalized electrons are shared by more than two atoms. The two

structures shown for the conjugate base of acetic acid are called 
resonance contributors
.Neither resonance contributor represents the actual structure of the conjugate base. The

actual structure
Ñcalled a resonance hybrid
Ñis a composite of the two resonance
contributors. The double-headed arrow between the two resonance contributors is used to

indicate that the actual structure is a hybrid. Notice that the two resonance contributors

differ only in the location of their electrons and lone-pair electrons
Ñall the atoms stayin the same place. In the resonance hybrid,the negative charge is shared equally by the

two oxygen atoms,and both carbon
Ðoxygen bonds are the same length
Ñthey are not as
long as a single bond,but they are longer than a double bond. A resonance hybrid can be

drawn by using dotted lines to show the delocalized electrons.
The following potential maps show that there is less electron density on the oxygen
atoms in the carboxylate ion (orange region) than on the oxygen atom of the alkoxide

ion (red region):
Thus,the combination of inductive electron withdrawal and the ability of two atoms to
share the negative charge decrease the electron density,making the conjugate base of

the carboxylic acid more stable than the conjugate base of the alcohol.CH3COdOdCH3CH2OCH3CCH
3CCH3CH2OOOCH3COOOOlocalized electronsresonance hybridresonance contributorsdelocalizedelectronspHpKa  4.76HCH3CH2OpKa  15.9CH3OCODelocalized electrons are shared by
more than two atoms.
3-D Molecule:Acetic acidBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 50
Section 1.20The Effect of pH on the Structure of an Organic Compound
51A compound will exist primarily in itsacidic form if the pH of the solution is
less than its p
Ka  .A compound will exist primarily in itsbasic form if the pH of the solution is
greater than its p
Ka  .We will discuss delocalized electrons in greater detail in Chapter7. By that time,
you will be thoroughly comfortable with compounds that have only localized elec-

trons,and you can then further explore how delocalized electrons affect the stability

and reactivity of organic compounds.
PROBLEM 41Which compound would you expect to be a stronger acid? Why?
PROBLEM 42Draw resonance contributors for the following compounds:
1.20The Effect of pH on the Structure 
of an Organic CompoundWhether a given acid will lose a proton in an aqueous solution depends on the of
the acid and on the pH of the solution. The relationship between the two is given by the

HendersonÐHasselbalch equation. This is an extremely useful equation because it
tells us whether a compound will exist in its acidic form (with its proton retained) or in

its basic form (with its proton removed) at a particular pH.
The HendersonÐHasselbalch equation tells us that when the pH of a solution equals
the of the compound that undergoes dissociation,the concentration of the com-

pound in its acidic form [HA] will equal the concentration of the compound in its

basic form (because ). If the pH of the solution is less than the of

the compound,the compound will exist primarily in its acidic form. If the pH of the

solution is greater than the of the compound,the compound will exist primarily in

its basic form. In other words,
compounds exist primarily in their acidic forms in solu-
tions that are more acidic than theirvalues and primarily in their basic forms in

solutions that are more basic than theirvalues.
If we know the pH of the solution and the of the compound,the Henderson
ÐHasselbalch equation allows us to calculate precisely how much of the compound will

be in its acidic form,and how much will be in its basic form. For example,when a

compound with a of 5.2 is in a solution of pH 5.2,half the compound will be in

the acidic form and the other half will be in the basic form(Figure1.20). If the pH is

one unit less than the of the compound there will be 10 times more

compound present in the acidic form than in the basic form (because ). If

the pH is two units less than the of the compound there will be 100

times more compound present in the acidic form than in the basic form (because
). If the pH is 6.2,there will be 10 times more compound in the basic form
than in the acidic form,and at there will be 100 times more compound

present in the basic form than in the acidic form.pH7.2log 1002(pH3.2),palog 101(pH4.2),papapaKKpapalog 10[A]papKa  pH  log[HA][A]the HendersonÐHasselbalch equationpaOÐÐOCOOÐÐONO+a.b.
CH3COCH
3SorOOOHOHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 51
etherwater52CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Bases1%50%90%99%3.24.25.2
pH  pKa  2pH  pKa  1pH  pKa  1pH  pKa  2pH  pKa pH6.27.2
10%acidic formbasic formFigure 1.20
The relative amounts of acompound with a of 5.2 in the

acidic and basic forms at different

pH values.pKaThe HendersonÐHasselbalch equation can be very useful in the laboratory when
compounds need to be separated from each other. Water and diethyl ether are not

miscible liquids and,therefore,will form two layers when combined. The ether layer

will lie above the more dense water layer. Charged compounds are more soluble in

water,whereas neutral compounds are more soluble in diethyl ether. Two compounds,

such as a carboxylic acid (RCOOH) with a of 5.0 and a protonated amine
with a of 10.0,dissolved in a mixture of water and diethyl ether,can be
separated by adjusting the pH of the water layer. For example,if the pH of the water

layer is 2,the carboxylic acid and the amine will both be in their acidic forms because

the pH of the water is less than the of both compounds. The acidic form of a car-

boxylic acid is neutral,whereas the acidic form of an amine is charged. Therefore,the

carboxylic acid will be more soluble in the ether layer,whereas the protonated amine

will be more soluble in the water layer.
For the most effective separation,it is best if the pH of the water layer is at least two
units away from the values of the compounds being separated. Then the relative

amounts of the compounds in their acidic and basic forms will be at least 100:1

(Figure 1.20).paRCOOHRCOO
Hacidic formbasic formRNH3RNH2H+paÕspa(RNH3 )paDERIVATION OF THE
HENDERSONÐHASSELBALCHEQUATION
The HendersonÐHasselbalch equation can be derived from the
expression that defines the acid dissociation constant:
Taking the logarithms of both sides of the equation and then,in
the next step,multiplying both sides of the equation by we

obtain1,a[H3O][A][HA]andSubstituting and remembering that when a fraction is inverted,
the sign of its log changes,we get
papHlog [HA][A]log alog[H3O]log [A][HA]log alog[H3O]log [A][HA]BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 52
The HendersonÐHasselbalch equation is also useful when one is working with
buffer solutions. A 
buffer solution
is a solution that maintains a nearly constant pH
when small amounts of acid or base are added to it. Buffer solutions are discussed in

detail in the Study Guide and Solutions Manual (see Special Topic I).
PROBLEM 43As long as the pH is greater than __________,more than 50% of a protonated amine with
a of 10.4 will be in its neutral,nonprotonated form.
PROBLEM 44SOLVED
a.At what pH will 99% of a compound with a of 8.4 be in its basic form?
b.At what pH will 91% of a compound with a of 3.7 be in its acidic form?

c.At what pH will 9% of a compound with a of 5.9 be in its basic form?

d.At what pH will 50% of a compound with a of 7.3 be in its basic form?
e.At what pH will 1% of a compound with a of 7.3 be in its acidic form?
SOLUTION TO 44a
If 99% is in the basic form and 1% is in the acidic form,the
HendersonÐHasselbalch equation becomesThere is a faster way to get the answer:If about 100 times more compound is present in the
basic form than in the acidic form,the pH will be two units more basic than the Thus,
SOLUTION TO 44b
If 91% is in the acidic form and 9% is in the basic form,there is
about 10 times more compound present in the acidic form. Therefore,the pH is one unit

more acidic than the Thus,pH
3.71.02.7.pa.pH8.42.010.4.pa. pH
10.4 8.4
pH2.0 8.4
pHlog .01 papHlog 199papapapapapaSection 1.20The Effect of pH on the Structure of an Organic Compound
53BLOOD: A BUFFERED SOLUTIONBlood is the fluid that transports oxygen to all thecells of the human body. The normal pH of human
blood is 7.35 to 7.45. Death will result if this pH decreases to a
value less than or increases to a value greater than 

for even a few seconds. Oxygen is carried to cells by a protein

in the blood called hemoglobin. When hemoglobin binds 

hemoglobin loses a proton,which would make the blood more

acidic if it did not contain a buffer to maintain its pH.
A carbonic acid/bicarbonate buffer is used to
control the pH of blood. An important feature of this buffer is

that carbonic acid decomposes to and 
H2O:CO2(H2CO3HCO3 )HbH+HbO2O2H+O2,8.06.8Cells need a constant supply of with very high levels re-
quired during periods of strenuous exercise. When is con-

sumed by cells,the hemoglobin equilibrium shifts to the left to

release more so the concentration of decreases. At the

same time,increased metabolism during exercise produces

large amounts of This shifts the carbonic acid/bicarbonate

equilibrium to the right,which increases the concentration of
Significant amounts of lactic acid are also produced during
exercise,and this further increases the concentration of 
Receptors in the brain respond to the increased concentra-
tion of and trigger a reflex that increases the rate of breath-

ing. This increases the release of oxygen to the cells and the

elimination of by exhalation. Both processes decrease the

concentration of in the blood.
HCO2HH.H.CO2.HO2,O2O2,H2CO3HCO3carbonic acidbicarbonate
HH2OCO2Tutorial:
Effect of pH on structure
BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 53
54CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and BasesLewis base: Have pair, will share.
Lewis acid: Need two from you.
PROBLEM 45a.Indicate whether a carboxylic acid (RCOOH) with a of 5 will be mostly charged or
mostly neutral in solutions with the following pH values:
1.3.5.7.

2.4.6.
b.Answer the same question for a protonated amine with a of 9.
c.Answer the same question for an alcohol (ROH) with a of 15.
PROBLEM 46For each compound in 1 and 2,indicate the pH at which
a.50% of the compound will be in a form that possesses a charge.
b.more than 99% of the compound will be in a form that possesses a charge.
1.2.PROBLEM 47For each of the following compounds,shown in their acidic forms,draw the form in which
it will predominate in a solution of a.f.
b.g.
c.h.

d.i.
e.j.
1.21Lewis Acids and BasesIn 1923,G. N. Lewis offered new definitions for the terms 
ÒacidÓand Òbase.ÓHe de-fined an acid as a species that accepts a share in an electron pair and a base as a

species that donates a share in an electron pair. All proton-donating acids fit the

Lewis definition because all proton-donating acids lose a proton and the proton ac-

cepts a share in an electron pair.
The Lewis definition of an acid is much broader than the Br
¿nstedÐLowry defini-
tion because it is not limited to compounds that donate protons. According to the

Lewis definition,compounds such as aluminum chloride boron trifluoride
and borane are acids because they have unfilled valence orbitals and thus
can accept a share in an electron pair. These compounds react with a compound that

has a lone pair just as a proton reacts with ammonia,but they are not proton-donating

acids. Thus,the Lewis definition of an acid includes all proton-donating acids and

some additional acids that do not have protons. Throughout this text,the term 
ÒacidÓisused to mean a proton-donating acid,and the term 
ÒLewis acidÓis used to refer to
non-proton-donating acids such as or All bases are 
Lewis basesbecausethey have a pair of electrons that they can share,either with an atom such as aluminum

or boron or with a proton.BF3.AlCl3(BH3)(BF3),(AlCl3),HNH3NH3acidbase            Haccepts a share in a pair
of electronsdonates a share ina pair of electronsHBr (p
a9)CH3CH2OH2 (pa2.5)
HNO3 (pa1.3)
CH3CH2OH (p
a15.9)
HNO2 (pa3.4)
H3O (pa1.7)
HCN (p
a9.1)
CH3CH2NH3 (pa11.0)NH4 (pa9.4)CH3COOH (p
a4.76)
pH7:CH3NH3 (pa10.7)
CH3CH2COOH (p
a4.9)
papa(RNH3)pH11pH7pH3pH13pH9pH5pH1paBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 54
Summary55SummaryOrganic compounds
are compounds that contain carbon.
The atomic numberof an atom equals the number of pro-
tons in its nucleus. The 
mass numberof an atom is the sum
of its protons and neutrons. Isotopeshave the same atomic
number,but different mass numbers.
An atomic orbitalindicates where there is a high proba-
bility of finding an electron. The closer the atomic orbital is

to the nucleus,the lower is its energy. 
Degenerate orbitalshave the same energy. Electrons are assigned to orbitals fol-

lowing the 
aufbau principle,the 
Pauli exclusion princi-
ple,and 
HundÕs rule.The octet rulestates that an atom will give up,accept,or
share electrons in order to fill its outer shell or attain an

outer shell with eight electrons. Electropositive
elementsreadily lose electrons; electronegative
elements readily ac-quire electrons. The 
electronic configuration
of an atomdescribes the orbitals occupied by the atomÕs electrons.Electrons in inner shells are called core electrons
; electronsin the outermost shell are called valence electrons
. Lone-pair electrons
are valence electrons that are not used in
bonding. Attractive forces between opposite charges are
called electrostatic attractions
. An ionic bondis formed
by a transfer of electrons; a 
covalent bond
is formed by
sharing electrons. A polar covalent bond has a 
dipole,mea-
sured by a dipole moment. The dipole momentof a mole-cule depends on the magnitudes and directions of the bond

dipole moments.Lewis structures
indicate which atoms are bonded to-
gether and show 
lone pairsand formal charges
. Acarbocationhas a positively charged carbon,a 
carbanionhas a negatively charged carbon,and a 
radicalhas an un-
paired electron.According to molecular orbital (MO) theory
,covalent
bonds result when atomic orbitals combine to form

molecular orbitals. Atomic orbitals combine to give a
bonding MOand a higher energy 
antibonding MO.Cylindrically symmetrical bonds are called sigma bonds; pi bondsform when porbitals overlap side-to-
side. Bond strength is measured by the 
bond dissociationenergy
. A bond is stronger than a bond. All 
singleps1P21S2PROBLEM 48What is the product of each of the following reactions?
PROBLEM 49Show how each of the following compounds reacts with 
a.c.e.g.
b.d.f.h.CH
3COOHFeBr3BF3NH4AlCl3CH3CH3NH3CH3OHHO:ClCH
3OCH3CH3CH3ClClAlClClClAlO
aluminum trichloridea Lewis aciddimethyl ethera Lewis baseHHH
HHHH
HBNHHHHBNboranea Lewis acidammoniaa Lewis basethe curved arrow indicates 
where the pair of electrons 
starts from and where it ends upa.CH3OHZnCl2c.ClÐAlCl3d.b.BrÐFeBr3BF3HCHOBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 55
56CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Basesbondsin organic compounds are bonds,a 
double bondconsists of one bond and one bond,and a 
triple bondconsists of one bond and two bonds. Triple bonds are

shorter and stronger than double bonds,which are shorter

and stronger than single bonds. To form four bonds,carbon

promotes an electron from a 2sto a 2
porbital. C,N,and O
form bonds using hybrid orbitals
. The hybridization
of C,
N,or O depends on the number of bonds the atom forms:

No bonds means that the atom is 
hybridized
,one 
bond indicates that it is hybridized
,and two bonds
signifies that it is 
sphybridized
. Exceptions are carboca-tions and carbon radicals,which are hybridized. The

more scharacter in the orbital used to form a bond,the
shorter and stronger the bond is and the larger the bond

angle is. Bonding and lone-pair electrons around an atom

are positioned as far apart as possible.
An acidis a species that donates a proton,and a 
baseis aspecies that accepts a proton. A 
Lewis acid
is a species thataccepts a share in an electron pair; a Lewis baseis a speciesthat donates a share in an electron pair.
Acidityis a measure of the tendency of a compound to
give up a proton. 
Basicityis a measure of a compound
Õsaffinity for a proton. The stronger the acid,the weaker is its

conjugate base. The strength of an acid is given by the 
aciddissociation constantApproximate values are as
pa(Ka).sp2psp2psp3pppspssfollows:protonated alcohols,protonated carboxylic acids,
protonated water carboxylic acids protonated

amines alcohols and water The 
pHof a solutionindicates the concentration of positively charged hydrogen

ions in the solution. In 
acidÐbase reactions
,the equilibrium
favors reaction of the strong and formation of the weak.
The strength of an acid is determined by the stability ofits conjugate base:The more stable the base,the stronger is

its conjugate acid. When atoms are similar in size,the more

acidic compound has its hydrogen attached to the more elec-

tronegative atom. When atoms are very different in size,the

more acidic compound has its hydrogen attached to the larg-

er atom. 
Inductive electron withdrawal
increases acidity;acidity decreases with increasing distance between the elec-
tron-withdrawing substituent and the ionizing group.
Delocalized electrons
are electrons shared by more thantwo atoms. A compound with delocalized electrons has

resonance
. The resonance hybrid
is a composite of theresonance contributors
,which differ only in the location of
their lone-pair and electrons.
The HendersonÐHasselbalch equationgives the rela-
tionship between and pH:A compound exists primarily

in its acidic form in solutions more acidic than its value

and primarily in its basic form in solutions more basic than

its value.
papapap15.10;5; 0;Key Terms
acid (p. 39)acidÐbase reaction (p. 40)acid dissociation constant (p.41)

acidity (p. 40)
antibonding molecular orbital (p. 21)
atomic number (p. 4)
atomic orbital (p. 5)
atomic weight (p. 4)
aufbau principle (p. 6)
base (p. 39)
basicity (p. 40)
bond (p. 8)
bond dissociation energy (p. 21)

bond length (p. 21)
bonding molecular orbital (p. 21)
bond strength (p. 21)
buffer solution (p. 53)

carbanion (p. 14)
carbocation (p. 14)
condensed structure (p. 16)
conjugate acid (p. 40)
conjugate base (p. 40)
constitutional isomer (p. 18)
core electrons (p. 7)
covalent bond (p. 9)

degenerate orbitals (p. 5)

delocalized electrons (p. 50)
debye (D) (p. 12)(a)dipole (p. 12)dipole moment (p. 12)

double bond (p. 30)
electronegative (p. 8)

electronegativity (p. 10)

electropositive (p. 7)

electrostatic attraction (p. 8)
electrostatic potential map (p. 11)
equilibrium constant (p. 41)
excited-state electronic configuration (p. 6)

formal charge (p. 13)

free radical (p. 14)
ground-state electronic configuration (p. 6)

Heisenberg uncertainty principle (p.18)

HendersonÐHasselbalch equation (p.51)
HundÕs rule (p. 7)hybrid orbital (p. 26)
hydride ion (p. 9)
hydrogen ion (p. 9)
inductive electron withdrawal (p. 47)

ionic bond (p. 8)
ionic compound (p. 9)
ionization energy (p. 7)

isotopes (p. 4)
Kekul
” structure (p. 16)Lewis acid (p. 54)

Lewis base (p. 54)

Lewis structure (p. 13)
mlone-pair electrons (p. 13)mass number (p. 4)
molecular weight (p. 4)
molecular orbital (p. 20)
molecular orbital (MO) theory (p. 20)
node (p. 18)
nodal plane (p. 19)
nonbonding electrons (p. 13)
nonpolar covalent bond (p. 10)

nonpolar molecule (p. 26)
octet rule (p. 7)
orbital (p. 4)
orbital hybridization (p. 26)
organic compound (p. 2)

Pauli exclusion principle (p. 6)

pH (p. 41)
pi bond (p. 23)
(p. 41)polar covalent bond (p. 10)

proton (p. 9)
proton-transfer reaction (p. 40)
quantum mechanics (p. 4)
radial node (p. 18)
radical (p. 18)
resonance (p. 51)
resonance contributors (p. 50)

resonance hybrid (p. 50)
sigma bond (p. 20)
(s)pa(p)BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 56
Problems57sigma bonding molecular 
orbital (p. 21)single bond (p. 29)
tetrahedral bond angle (p. 28)(s)tetrahedral carbon (p. 28)
trigonal planar carbon (p. 30)
triple bond (p. 32)
valence electrons (p. 7)
valence-shell electron-pair repulsion
(VSEPR) model (p. 24)wave equation (p. 4)

wave functions (p. 4)
Problems
50.Draw a Lewis structure for each of the following species:
a.d.g.

b.e.h.

c.f.i.
51.Give the hybridization of the central atom of each of the following species,and tell whether the bond arrangement around it 
islinear,trigonal planar,or tetrahedral:
a.d.g.HCN

b.e.h.

c.f.i.
52.Draw the condensed structure of a compound that contains only carbon and hydrogen atoms and that has
a.three hybridized carbons.

b.one hybridized carbon and two hybridized carbons.

c.two hybridized carbons and two 
sphybridized carbons.53.Predict the indicated bond angles:
a.the bond angle in f.the bond angle in 
b.the bond angle in g.the bond angle in 
c.the bond angle in h.the bond angle in 
d.the bond angle in i.the bond angle in 

e.the bond angle in 
54.Give each atom the appropriate formal charge:
a.c.e.
g.b.d.f.h.
55.Draw the ground-state electronic configuration for:
a.Cab.c.Ard.
56.Write the Kekul
” structure for each of the following compounds:
a.c.e.

b.d.f.
57.Show the direction of the dipole moment in each of the following bonds (use the electronegativities given in Table 1.3):
a.c.e.

b.d.f.
58.What is the hybridization of the indicated atom in each of the following molecules?
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
CH3OCH2CH3CH3CNCH3CCH3OCH3CHNCH
3CH3CH2OHCH2CH3CH(CH3)2NHIBrCH3LiCH3OHHONH2CH3Br(CH3)2CHCH(CH3)CH2C(CH3)3(CH3)3COHCH3OCH3CH3CH(OH)CH2CNCH3COOHCH3CHOMg2Ca2CH3CH3HONHHHBHHHHHNHOHHHCHHCNCH3CH3CH3CH3HOCH3OHCOHCH3CH2NH2CCNCH3OCH3COCCH3C     NCCN(CH3)2NH2CNCBF4FBF(CH3)2NHCNCH2COHCH(CH3)2NHCNHsp3sp2sp3sp3H3OCH3CH3C(CH3)4NH4BH3CH3NH3H2NOCH3N2 H2CONOCH3NH2CO3 2CO2N2H4H2CO3BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:58 PM  Page 57
58CHAPTER 1
Electronic Structure and Bonding ¥ Acids and Bases59.a.Which of the indicated bonds in each molecule is shorter?
b.Indicate the hybridization of the C,O,and N atoms in each of the molecules.
1.3.5.
2.4.
60.For each of the following compounds,draw the form in which it will predominate at and 
a.b.c.
61.Which of the following molecules have tetrahedral bond angles?
62.Do the hybridized carbons and the indicated atoms lie in the same plane?
63.Give the products of the following acid
Ðbase reactions,and indicate whether reactants or products are favored at equilibrium (use
the values that are given in Section1.17):
a.c.
b.d.
64.For each of the following molecules,indicate the hybridization of each carbon atom and give the approximate values of all th
ebond angles:a.b.c.
65.a.Estimate the value of each of the following acids without using a calculator (i.e.,between 3 and 4,between 9 and 10,etc.):
1.nitrous acid 4.hydrogen cyanide (HCN),

2.nitric acid 5.formic acid (HCOOH),

3.bicarbonate 
b.Determine the values,using a calculator.
c.Which is the strongest acid?
66.a.List the following carboxylic acids in order of decreasing acidity:
1.2.3.4.
b.How does the presence of an electronegative substituent such as Cl affect the acidity of a carboxylic acid?
c.How does the location of the substituent affect the acidity of a carboxylic acid?
67.Draw a Lewis structure for each of the following species:
68.a.For each of the following pairs of reactions,indicate which one has the more favorable equilibrium constant (that is,which
 onemost favors products):
a.  CH3N2+b.  CH2N2c.  N3Ðd.  N2O (arranged NNO)CH3CHCH2COOHKa  8.9  105ClClCH2CH2CH2COOHKa  2.96  105CH3CH2CHCOOHKa  1.39  103ClCH3CH2CH2COOHKa  1.52  105pa(HCO3 ), a6.31011a2.0104(HNO3), a22a7.91010(HNO2), a4.0104paCH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3CCHCH3CH2OHHClCH3CH2OHNH2OCH3COHCH3NH2OCH3COHCH3OpaCH3CH3CH3HHCH2CH3CCCH3HHCH3CCsp2H2O    H3O+    +CH3    BF3    NH3    +NH4    ÐCH3     pKa12.4
pKa11.0
pKa4.8
CF3CH2OHCH3CH2NH3CH3COOHpH14:pH3, pH6, pH10,CHCC
HHHCOOHCH3CCH2CHCC
CCCH3CH3HHHCH2CH2NCHCH3CH3NHCHCCHCH3CHBRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:59 PM  Page 58
Problems591.or2.orb.Which of the four reactions has the most favorable equilibrium constant?
69.The following compound has two isomers:
One isomer has a dipole moment of 0 D,and the other has a dipole moment of 2.95 D. Propose structures for the two isomers that
are consistent with these data.70.Knowing that and that the concentration of water in a solution of water is 55.5 M,show that the of water is
15.7. (Hint:)71.Water and diethyl ether are immiscible liquids. Charged compounds dissolve in water,and uncharged compounds dissolve in ethe
r.has a of 4.8 and has a of 10.7.
a.What pH would you make the water layer in order to cause both compounds to dissolve in it?

b.What pH would you make the water layer in order to cause the acid to dissolve in the water layer and the amine to dissolve in
the ether layer?c.What pH would you make the water layer in order to cause the acid to dissolve in the ether layer and the amine to dissolve in
the water layer?
72.How could you separate a mixture of the following compounds? The reagents available to you are water,ether,1.0 M HCl,and 1.0
M NaOH. (Hint:See problem 70.)73.Using molecular orbital theory,explain why shining light on causes it to break apart into atoms,but shining light on does
not break the molecule apart.74.Show that 

75.Carbonic acid has a of 6.1 at physiological temperature. Is the carbonic acid/bicarbonate buffer system that maintains the p
Hof the blood at 7.3 better at neutralizing excess acid or excess base?
76.a.If an acid with a of 5.3 is in an aqueous solution of pH 5.7,what percentage of the acid is present in the acidic form?
b.At what pH will 80% of the acid exist in the acidic form?
77.Calculate the pH values of the following solutions:
a.a 1.0 M solution of acetic acid 

b.a 0.1 M solution of protonated methylamine 

c.a solution containing 0.3 M HCOOH and 0.1 M (of )
HCOOH3.76paHCOO(pa10.7)(pa4.76)papaeqa  reactant acida  product acid[products][reactants]H2Br2NH3ClpKa  10.66ClOHpKa  9.95NH3ClpKa  4.60COOHpKa  4.17paC6H11NH3paC6H11COOHpOHlog[HO].papHpOH14ClCHCHClCH3CH2OHCH3NH2CH3CH2OCH3NH3CH3CH2OHNH3CH3CH2ONH4CH3OHNH3CH3ONH4CH3CH2OHNH3CH3CH2ONH4For help in answering Problems 75
Ð77,see Special Topic I in the Study Guide

and Solutions Manual.BRUI01-001_059r4  20-03-2003  2:59 PM  Page 59
CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2BrCH3OCH3CH3CH2ClCH
3CH2OHThis book organizes or-
ganic chemistry ac-
cording to how organic
compounds react. In studying

how compounds react,we must not

forget that whenever a compound undergoes a reaction,a new compound is synthe-

sized. In other words,while we are learning how organic compounds react,we will si-

multaneously be learning how to synthesize new organic compounds.
The main classes of compounds that are synthesized by the reactions you will study
in Chapters 3Ð11are alkanes,alkyl halides,ethers,alcohols,and amines. As you learn

how to synthesize compounds,you will need to be able to refer to them by name,so

you will begin your study of organic chemistry by learning how to name these five

classes of compounds.First you will learn how to name alkanes because they form the basis for the names
of almost all organic compounds. 
Alkanesare composed of only carbon atoms and
hydrogen atoms and contain only single bonds. Compounds that contain only carbon

and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons
,so an alkane is a hydrocarbon that has only
single bonds. Alkanes in which the carbons form a continuous chain with no branches

are called straight-chain alkanes. The names of several straight-chain alkanes are
given in Table2.1. It is important that you learn the names of at least the first 10.
The family of alkanes shown in the table is an example of a homologous series. A
homologous series(homosis Greek for Òthe same asÓ) is a family of compounds in
which each member differs from the next by one 
methylene group
. The mem-
bers of a homologous series are called homologs. Propane and butane
are homologs.If you look at the relative numbers of carbon and hydrogen atoms in the alkanes
listed in Table2.1,you will see that the general molecular formula for an alkane is
(CH3CH2CH2CH3)(CH3CH2CH3)(CH2)YZY is reactingZ is being synthesized
602An Introduction to Organic CompoundsNomenclature, Physical Properties, and Representation of StructureBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 60
Introduction61where nis any integer. So,if an alkane has one carbon atom,it must have
four hydrogen atoms; if it has two carbon atoms,it must have six hydrogens.
We have seen that carbon forms four covalent bonds and hydrogen forms only one
covalent bond (Section1.4). This means that there is only one possible structure for an

alkane with molecular formula (methane) and only one structure for an alkane

with molecular formula (ethane). We examined the structures of these com-

pounds in Section1.7. There is also only one possible structure for an alkane with

molecular formula (propane).
As the number of carbons in an alkane increases beyond three,the number of pos-
sible structures increases. There are two possible structures for an alkane with molec-

ular formula In addition to butane
Ña straight-chain alkaneÑthere is abranched butane called isobutane. Both of these structures fulfill the requirement that

each carbon forms four bonds and each hydrogen forms only one bond.Compounds such as butane and isobutane that have the same molecular formula
butdiffer in the order in which the atoms are connected are called 
constitutionalisomersÑtheir molecules have different constitutions. In fact,isobutane got its name
because it is an ÒisoÓmer of butane. The structural unit
Ña carbon bonded to a hydro-
gen and two groups
Ñthat occurs in isobutane has come to be called 
Òiso.ÓThus,the name isobutane tells you that the compound is a four-carbon alkane with an iso

structural unit.CH3CH2CH2CH3butaneCH3CHCH3isobutaneCH3CH3CHan ÒisoÓstructural unitCH3CH3C4H10.C3H8C2H6CH4CH22,CHHKekul” structurenamecondensed structureball-and-stick model
HCH
4HmethaneCHHCHHCH
3CH3HHethaneCHHCHCH
HHCH
3CH2CH3HHpropaneCHHCHCH
HCH
HHCH
3CH2CH2CH3HHbutane3-D Molecules:Methane; Ethane; 
Propane; ButaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 61
62CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsThere are three alkanes with molecular formula Pentane is the straight-
chain alkane. Isopentane,as its name indicates,has an iso structural unit and five car-

bon atoms. The third isomer is called neopentane. The structural unit with a carbon

surrounded by four other carbons is called Òneo.ÓThere are five constitutional isomers with molecular formula We are now
able to name three of them (hexane,isohexane,and neohexane),but we cannot name

the other two without defining names for new structural units. (For now,ignore the

names written in blue.)C6H14.CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3pentaneCH3CHCH2CH3isopentaneCH3CH3CCH3neopentaneCH3CH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3a ÒneoÓstructural unitC5H12.Table 2.1Nomenclature and Physical Properties of Straight-Chain Alkanes
NumberBoilingMelting
ofMolecularCondensedpointpointDensity
acarbonsformulaNamestructure(¡C)(¡C)(gmL)
1methane
2ethane

3propane

4butane

5pentane36.10.5572

6hexane68.70.6603

7heptane98.40.6837

8octane127.70.7026

9nonane150.80.7177
10decane174.00.7299

11undecane195.80.7402

12dodecane216.30.7487

13tridecane235.40.7546
20eicosane343.036.80.7886
21heneicosane356.540.50.7917
30triacontane449.765.80.8097
aDensity is temperature dependent. The densities given are those determined at 20 
¡C 20¡.CH3(CH2)28CH3C30H62CH3(CH2)19CH3C21H44CH3(CH2)18CH3C20H425.5CH3(CH2)11CH3C13H289.6CH3(CH2)10CH3C12H2625.6CH3(CH2)9CH3C11H2429.7CH3(CH2)8CH3C10H2253.5CH3(CH2)7CH3C9H2056.8CH3(CH2)6CH3C8H1890.6CH3(CH2)5CH3C7H1695.3CH3(CH2)4CH3C6H14129.8CH3(CH2)3CH3C5H12138.30.5CH3CH2CH2CH3C4H10187.742.1CH3CH2CH3C3H8183.388.6CH3CH3C2H6182.5167.7CH4CH4CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3hexane
hexaneCH3CHCH2CH2CH3isohexane2-methylpentaneCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH33-methylpentaneCH3CH3CHCHCH
32,3-dimethylbutaneCH3CH3CH3CCH2CH3neohexane2,2-dimethylbutaneCH3CH3common name:systematic name:BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 62
Section 2.1Nomenclature of Alkyl Substituents
63There are nine alkanes with molecular formula We can name only two of
them (heptane and isoheptane) without defining new structural units. Notice that neo-

heptane cannot be used as a name because three different heptanes have a carbon that

is bonded to four other carbons and a name must specify only one compound.The number of constitutional isomers increases rapidly as the number of carbons inan alkane increases. For example,there are 75 alkanes with molecular formula 

and 4347 alkanes with molecular formula To avoid having to memorize the

names of thousands of structural units,chemists have devised rules that name com-

pounds on the basis of their structures. That way,only the rules have to be learned. Be-

cause the name is based on the structure,these rules make it possible to deduce the

structure of a compound from its name.This method of nomenclature is called 
systematic nomenclature
. It is also calledIUPAC nomenclature
because it was designed by a commission of the International
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (abbreviated IUPAC and pronounced 
Òeye-you-
packÓ) at a meeting in Geneva,Switzerland,in 1892. The IUPAC rules have been con-
tinually revised by the commission since then. Names such as isobutane and

neopentaneÑnonsystematic namesÑare called common namesand are shown in red
in this text. The systematic or IUPAC names are shown in blue. Before we can under-

stand how a systematic name for an alkane is constructed,we must learn how to name

alkyl substituents.
2.1Nomenclature of Alkyl Substituents
Removing a hydrogen from an alkane results in an 
alkyl substituent
(or an alkyl
group). Alkyl substituents are named by replacing the 
ÒaneÓending of the alkane withÒyl.ÓThe letter ÒRÓis used to indicate any alkyl group.
CH3a methyl groupCH3CH2an ethyl groupCH3CH2CH2a propyl groupCH3CH2CH2CH2a butyl groupRany alkyl groupC15H32.C10H22CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3heptaneheptanecommon name:systematic name:CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3isoheptane2-methylhexaneCH3CH3CCHCH
32,2,3-trimethylbutaneCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH33-methylhexane2,3-dimethylpentane
CH3CHCHCH
2CH3CH3CH32,4-dimethylpentaneCH3CHCH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2CH2CH32,2-dimethylpentaneCH3CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH33,3-dimethylpentaneCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH33-ethylpentaneCH2CH3C7H16.A compound can have more than one
name, but a name must specify only one
compound.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 63
64CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsIf a hydrogen of an alkane is replaced by an OH,the compound becomes an
alcohol; if it is replaced by an the compound becomes an 
amine; and if it is re-placed by a halogen,the compound becomes an 
alkyl halide
.An alkyl group name followed by the name of the class of the compound (alcohol,
amine,etc.) yields the common name of the compound. The following examples show

how alkyl group names are used to build common names:
Notice that there is a space between the name of the alkyl group and the name of the
class of compound,except in the case of amines.
Two alkyl groups
Ña propyl group and an isopropyl group
Ñcontain three carbonatoms. A propyl group is obtained when a hydrogen is removed from a 
primary carbon
of propane. A 
primary carbonis a carbon that is bonded to only one other carbon. An
isopropyl group is obtained when a hydrogen is removed from the 
secondary carbon
of propane. A 
secondary carbonis a carbon that is bonded to two other carbons. No-
tice that an isopropyl group,as its name indicates,has its three carbon atoms arranged

as an iso structural unit.Molecular structures can be drawn in different ways. Isopropyl chloride,for exam-
ple,is drawn here in two ways. Both represent the same compound. At first glance,the

two-dimensional representations appear to be different:The methyl groups are across

from one another in one structure and at right angles in the other. The structures are

identical,however,because carbon is tetrahedral. The four groups bonded to the cen-

tral carbon
Ña hydrogen,a chlorine,and two methyl groups
Ñpoint to the corners of a
tetrahedron. If you rotate the three-dimensional model on the right 90
¡in a clockwisedirection,you should be able to see that the two models are the same. (You can simu-

late this rotation on the Web site www.prenhall.com/bruiceby visiting the Molecule

Gallery in Chapter 2.)CH3CHCH3ClCH3CHClCH3isopropyl chloride
isopropyl chloride
two different ways to draw isopropyl chlorideCH3CH2CH2a propyl groupCH3CHCH3an isopropyl groupa primary carbona secondary carbonCH3CH2CH2Clpropyl chlorideCH3CHCH3isopropyl chlorideClCH3OHmethyl alcoholCH3CH2NH2ethylamineCH3CH2CH2Brpropyl bromideCH3CH2CH2CH2Clbutyl chlorideCH3Imethyl iodideCH3CH2OHethyl alcoholCH3CH2CH2NH2propylamineCH3CH2CH2CH2OHbutyl alcoholROH
an alcoholRNH
2an amineRXX  F, Cl, Br, or Ian alkyl halideNH2,Build models of the two representations
of isopropyl chloride, and convince

yourself that they represent the same

compound.methyl alcoholmethyl chloridemethylamine3-D Molecules:Isopropyl chlorideBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 64
Section 2.1Nomenclature of Alkyl Substituents
65There are four alkyl groups that contain four carbon atoms. The butyl and isobutyl
groups have a hydrogen removed from a primary carbon. A 
sec-butyl group has a hy-
drogen removed from a secondary carbon (
sec-,often abbreviated 
s-,stands for sec-
ondary),and a 
tert-butyl group has a hydrogen removed from a tertiary carbon (
tert-,sometimes abbreviated 
t-,stands for tertiary). A 
tertiary carbonis a carbon that isbonded to three other carbons. Notice that the isobutyl group is the only group with an

iso structural unit.A name of a straight-chain alkyl group often has the prefix 
ÒnÓ(for ÒnormalÓ),to
emphasize that its carbon atoms are in an unbranched chain. If the name does not have

a prefix such as 
ÒnÓor Òiso,Óit is assumed that the carbons are in an unbranched chain.
butyl bromidepentyl fluoride
oror
n-butyl bromide
n-pentyl fluorideLike the carbons,the hydrogens in a molecule are also referred to as primary,sec-
ondary,and tertiary. 
Primary hydrogens
are attached to primary carbons,
secondaryhydrogens
to secondary carbons,and 
tertiary hydrogens
to tertiary carbons.Because a chemical name must specify only one compound,the only time you
will see the prefix 
ÒsecÓis in sec-butyl. The name 
Òsec-pentylÓcannot be used be-
cause pentane has two different secondary carbon atoms. Therefore,there are two

different alkyl groups that result from removing a hydrogen from a secondary car-

bon of pentane. Because the name would specify two different compounds,it is not

a correct name.CH3CHCH2CH2CH3ClBoth alkyl halides have five carbon atoms with a chloride attached to a secondary carbon, so both compounds would be named sec-pentyl chloride.CH3CH2CHCH2CH3ClCH3CH2CH2CH2FCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2a butyl groupCH3CHCH2CH3an isobutyl groupCH3CH2CHCH3a sec-butyl groupCH3CCH3CH3a tert-butyl groupa secondary carbona tertiary carbon
a primary carbona primary carbonbutyl alcohol
orn-butyl alcohol
isobutyl alcohol
sec-butyl alcohol
ors-butyl alcohol
tert-butyl alcohol
ort-butyl alcohol
CH3COHCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OHprimary hydrogensCH3CHCH2OHCH3tertiary hydrogenCH3CH2CHOHCH3secondary hydrogensA primary carbon is bonded to onecarbon, a secondary carbon is bonded to
two carbons, and a tertiary carbon is
bonded to three carbons.
3-D Molecules:n-Butyl alcohol; sec-Butyl alcohol; tert-Butyl alcoholTutorial:
Alkyl group nomenclatureTutorial:
Degree of alkyl substitutionBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 65
66CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsThe prefix 
ÒtertÓis found in 
tert-butyl and 
tert-pentyl because each of these sub-
stituent names describes only one alkyl group. The name 
Òtert-hexyl
Ócannot be used
because it describes two different alkyl groups. (In older literature,you might find

ÒamylÓused instead of ÒpentylÓto designate a five-carbon alkyl group.)
If you examine the following structures,you will see that whenever the prefix 
ÒisoÓis used,the iso structural unit will be at one end of the molecule and any group replac-

ing a hydrogen will be at the other end:Noticethat an iso group has a methyl group on the next-to-the-last carbon in the chain.
Notice also that allisoalkyl compounds have the substituent (OH,Cl,etc.) on a
primary carbon,except for isopropyl,which has the substituent on a secondary carbon.

The isopropyl group could have been called a 
sec-propyl group. Either name would
have been appropriate because the group has an iso structural unit and a hydrogen has

been removed from a secondary carbon. Chemists decided to call it isopropyl,howev-

er,which means that 
ÒsecÓis used only for sec-butyl.
Alkyl group names are used so frequently that you should learn them. Some of the
most common alkyl group names are compiled in Table2.2for your convenience.
PROBLEM 1Draw the structures and name the four constitutional isomers with molecular formula
C4H9  Br.NH2,CH3CHCH2CH2CH2ClCH3isohexyl chlorideCH3CHCH2CH2OHCH3isopentyl alcoholorisoamyl alcoholCH3CHCH2BrCH3isobutyl bromideCH3CHCH2NH2CH3isobutylamineCH3CHBrCH3isopropyl bromideCH3CHCH2CH2OHCH3isopentyl alcoholCH3CBr
CH3CH3tert-butyl bromideBrCH3CCH2CH3CH3tert-pentyl bromideCH3CH2CBr
CH3CH2CH3Both alkyl bromides have six carbon atoms with abromine attached to a tertiary carbon, so both
compounds would be named tert-hexyl bromide.CH3CH2CH2CBr
CH3CH3Table 2.2
Names of Some Alkyl Groups
CH3CCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2pentylCH3CHCH2CH2isopentylCH3CH3CH3CH2CHsec-butyltert-butylCH3CH3methylCH3CH2ethylCH3CH2CH2propylCH3CHisopropylCH3CH3CHCH2isobutylCH3CH2CH2CH2butylCH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2hexylneopentylCH3CHCH2CH2CH2isohexylCH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 66
Section 2.2Nomenclature of Alkanes
67First, determine the number of carbonsin the longest continuous chain.Number the chain so that thesubstituent gets the lowest possible
number.
PROBLEM 2Which of the following can be used to verify that carbon is tetrahedral?
a.Methyl bromide does not have constitutional isomers.
b.Tetrachloromethane does not have a dipole moment.

c.Dibromomethane does not have constitutional isomers.
PROBLEM 3Write a structure for each of the following compounds:
a.isopropyl alcohold.neopentyl chloride
b.isopentyl fluoridee.
tert-butylamine
c.sec-butyl iodidef.
n-octyl bromide2.2Nomenclature of Alkanes
The systematic name of an alkane is obtained using the following rules:
1.Determine the number of carbons in the longest continuous carbon chain. This
chain is called the parent hydrocarbon
. The name that indicates the number of
carbons in the parent hydrocarbon becomes the alkane
Õs Òlast name.ÓFor exam-
ple,a parent hydrocarbon with eight carbons would be called 
octane. Thelongest continuous chain is not always a straight chain; sometimes you have to

Òturn a cornerÓto obtain the longest continuous chain.2.The name of any alkyl substituent that hangs off the parent hydrocarbon is cited
before the name of the parent hydrocarbon,together with a number to designate

the carbon to which the alkyl substituent is attached. The chain is numbered in

the direction that gives the substituent as low a number as possible. The sub-

stituentÕs name and the name of the parent hydrocarbon are joined in one word,
and there is a hyphen between the number and the substituentÕs name.CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH32-methylpentane3-ethylhexane
4-isopropyloctane12345
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH3CH2CH3654321
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH3CH312345678
4-ethyloctane4-methyloctane4-propyloctane
CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3three different alkanes with an eight-carbon parent hydrocarbon876543
321
21CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH3CH2CH2CH387654CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH345678
321
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 67
68CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsA number and a word are separated by
a hyphen; numbers are separated by a

comma.di, tri, tetra, sec,and tertare ignored in
alphabetizing.iso, neo, and cyclo are not ignored in
alphabetizing.Notice that only systematic names have numbers; common names never contain
numbers.3.If more than one substituent is attached to the parent hydrocarbon,the chain is
numbered in the direction that will result in the lowest possible number in the name

of the compound. The substituents are listed in alphabetical (not numerical) order,

with each substituent getting the appropriate number. In the following example,the

correct name (5-ethyl-3-methyloctane) contains a 3 as its lowest number,while the

incorrect name (4-ethyl-6-methyloctane) contains a 4 as its lowest number:
If two or more substituents are the same,the prefixes 
Òdi,ÓÒtri,Óand ÒtetraÓare used to indicate how many identical substituents the compound has. The

numbers indicating the locations of the identical substituents are listed together,

separated by commas. Notice that there must be as many numbers in a name as

there are substituents.The prefixes di,tri,tetra,
sec,and 
tertare ignored in alphabetizing substituent
groups,but the prefixes iso,neo,and cyclo are not ignored.
4.When both directions lead to the same lowest number for one of the substituents,
the direction is chosen that gives the lowest possible number to one of the re-

maining substituents.5.If the same substituent numbers are obtained in both directions,the first group
cited receives the lower number.
CH3CCH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH32,2,4-trimethylpentanenot2,4,4-trimethylpentanebecause 2  4CH3CH2CHCHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH36-ethyl-3,4-dimethyloctanenot3-ethyl-5,6-dimethyloctanebecause 4  5CH2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH33,3,6-triethyl-7-methyldecaneCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CHCH3CHCH3CH35-isopropyl-2-methyloctaneCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH3CH3CH32,4-dimethylhexaneCH3CH2CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH3CH33,3,4,4-tetramethylheptaneCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH35-ethyl-3-methyloctanenot4-ethyl-6-methyloctanebecause 3  4CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3isohexane2-methylpentanecommon name:systematic name:Substituents are listed in alphabetical
order.
Numbers are used only for systematic
names, never for common names.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 68
Section 2.2Nomenclature of Alkanes
69Only if the same set of numbers isobtained in both directions does the

first group cited get the lower number.
In the case of two hydrocarbon chains
with the same number of carbons,
choose the one with the most
substituents.6.If a compound has two or more chains of the same length,the parent hydrocar-
bon is the chain with the greatest number of substituents.7.Names such as 
Òisopropyl,
ÓÒsec-butyl,
Óand Òtert-butyl
Óare acceptable sub-
stituent names in the IUPAC system of nomenclature,but systematic substituent

names are preferable. Systematic substituent names are obtained by numbering

the alkyl substituent starting at the carbon that is attached to the parent hydrocar-

bon. This means that the carbon that is attached to the parent hydrocarbon is

always the number 1 carbon of the substituent. In a compound such as

4-(1-methylethyl)octane,the substituent name is in parentheses; the number in-

side the parentheses indicates a position on the substituent,whereas the number

outside the parentheses indicates a position on the parent hydrocarbon.Some substituents have only a systematic name.
These rules will allow you to name thousands of alkanes,and eventually you will
learn the additional rules necessary to name many other kinds of compounds. The

rules are important if you want to look up a compound in the scientific literature,be-

cause it usually will be listed by its systematic name.Nevertheless,you must still learn

common names because they have been in existence for so long and are so entrenched

in chemistsÕvocabulary that they are widely used in scientific conversation and are
often found in the literature.Look at the systematic names (the ones written in blue) for the isomeric hexanes
and isomeric heptanes at the beginning of this chapter to make sure you understand

how they are constructed.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCHCH3CH2CH2CH3CH36-(1,2-dimethylpropyl)-4-propyldecane2,3-dimethyl-5-(2-methylbutyl)decane
123CH3CH3CH3CHCHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH31234
CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCH3CH34-isopropyloctaneor4-(1-methylethyl)octane12CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CHCH3CH35-isobutyldecaneor5-(2-methylpropyl)decane123CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCH3CH33-ethyl-2-methylhexane (two substituents)CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCH3CH3not3-isopropylhexane (one substituent)1123456
23456
CH3CHCHCH3BrCl2-bromo-3-chlorobutanenot3-bromo-2-chlorobutaneCH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH33-ethyl-5-methylheptanenot5-ethyl-3-methylheptaneTutorial:
Basic nomenclature of alkanesBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 69
PROBLEM 4Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.2,3-dimethylhexaned.2,2-dimethyl-4-propyloctane
b.4-isopropyl-2,4,5-trimethylheptanee.4-isobutyl-2,5-dimethyloctane
c.4,4-diethyldecanef.4-(1,1-dimethylethyl)octane
PROBLEM 5SOLVED
a.Draw the 18 isomeric octanes.
b.Give each isomer its systematic name.

c.How many isomers have common names?

d.Which isomers contain an isopropyl group?

e.Which isomers contain a 
sec-butyl group?
f.Which isomers contain a 
tert-butyl group?
SOLUTION TO 5a
Start with the isomer with an eight-carbon continuous chain. Then
draw isomers with a seven-carbon continuous chain plus one methyl group. Next,draw

isomers with a six-carbon continuous chain plus two methyl groups or one ethyl group.

Then draw isomers with a five-carbon continuous chain plus three methyl groups or one

methyl group and one ethyl group. Finally,draw a four-carbon continuous chain with four

methyl groups. (You will be able to tell whether you have drawn duplicate structures by

your answers to 3b because if two structures have the same systematic name,they are the

same compound.)PROBLEM 6Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.e.PROBLEM 7Draw the structure and give the systematic name of a compound with a molecular formula
that hasa.only primary and secondary hydrogensc.one tertiary hydrogen
b.only primary hydrogensd.two secondary hydrogens
C5H12CH3CH2C(CH2CH3)2CH(CH3)CH(CH2CH2CH3)2CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3CH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH(CH3)2CH3CH2C(CH2CH3)2CH2CH2CH3CH3CCHCH
2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2C(CH3)3CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CCH3CH3CH3CH370CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 70
Section 2.3Nomenclature of Cycloalkanes
712.3Nomenclature of Cycloalkanes
Cycloalkanesare alkanes with their carbon atoms arranged in a ring. Because of the
ring,a cycloalkane has two fewer hydrogens than an acyclic (noncyclic) alkane with

the same number of carbons. This means that the general molecular formula for a

cycloalkane is Cycloalkanes are named by adding the prefix 
Òcyclo
Óto thealkane name that signifies the number of carbon atoms in the ring.
Cycloalkanes are almost always written as 
skeletal structures
. Skeletal structures
show the carbon
Ðcarbon bonds as lines,but do not show the carbons or the hydrogens
bonded to carbons. Atoms other than carbon and hydrogens bonded to atoms other

than carbon are shown. Each vertex in a skeletal structure represents a carbon. It is un-

derstood that each carbon is bonded to the appropriate number of hydrogens to give

the carbon four bonds.Acyclic molecules can also be represented by skeletal structures. In a skeletal struc-
ture of an acyclic molecule,the carbon chains are represented by zigzag lines. Again,

each vertex represents a carbon,and carbons are assumed to be present where a line

begins or ends.
The rules for naming cycloalkanes resemble the rules for naming acyclic alkanes:
1.In the case of a cycloalkane with an attached alkyl substituent,the ring is the par-
ent hydrocarbon unless the substituent has more carbon atoms than the ring. In

that case,the substituent is the parent hydrocarbon and the ring is named as a sub-

stituent. There is no need to number the position of a single substituent on a ring.
2.If the ring has two different substituents,they are cited in 
alphabetical order
andthe number 1 position is given to the substituent cited first.
3.If there are more than two substituents on the ring,they are cited in alphabetical
order. The substituent given the number 1 position is the one that results in a second
ethylcyclohexanemethylcyclopentaneCH2CH31-cyclobutylpentaneCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3cyclopropanecyclobutanecyclopentanecyclohexane
cyclopropaneH2CCH
2CH2H2CCH2CH2CH2CH2H2CcyclobutaneH2CCH
2H2CCH
2cyclopentanecyclohexane
H2CCH
2H2CCH
2CH2CH2.If there is only one substituent on a
ring, do not give that substituent a
number.
2-methylhexanebutane3-methyl-4-propylheptane6-ethyl-2,3-dimethylnonane
64231531421-methyl-2-propylcyclopentaneH3CCH2CH2CH31-ethyl-3-methylcyclopentaneCH3CH2CH31,3-dimethylcyclohexaneCH3CH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 71
substituent getting as low a number as possible. If two substituents have the same
low number,the ring is numbered
Ñeither clockwise or counterclockwiseÑinthedirection that gives the third substituent the lowest possible number. For

example,the correct name of the following compound is 4-ethyl-2-methyl-

1-propylcyclohexane,not 5-ethyl-1-methyl-2-propylcyclohexane:
PROBLEM 8Convert the following condensed structures into skeletal structures (remember that con-
densed structures show atoms but few,if any,bonds,whereas skeletal structures show

bonds but few,if any,atoms):
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 9Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH2CH3H3CH3CCH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3BrCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH4-ethyl-2-methyl-1-propylcyclohexanenot1-ethyl-3-methyl-4-propylcyclohexanebecause 2  3not5-ethyl-1-methyl-2-propylcyclohexanebecause 4  51,1,2-trimethylcyclopentanenot1,2,2-trimethylcyclopentanebecause 1  2not1,1,5-trimethylcyclopentanebecause 2  5CH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH372CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsTutorial:
Advanced alkane
nomenclatureBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 72
2.4Nomenclature of Alkyl Halides
Alkyl halides are compounds in which a hydrogen of an alkane has been replaced by a
halogen. Alkyl halides are classified as primary,secondary,or tertiary,depending on

the carbon to which the halogen is attached. 
Primary alkyl halides
have a halogen
bonded to a primary carbon,
secondary alkyl halides
have a halogen bonded to a sec-
ondary carbon,and 
tertiary alkyl halides
have a halogen bonded to a tertiary carbon
(Section2.1). The lone-pair electrons on the halogens are generally not shown unless

they are needed to draw your attention to some chemical property of the atom.
The common names of alkyl halides consist of the name of the alkyl group,fol-
lowed by the name of the halogen
Ñwith the 
ÒineÓending of the halogen name re-
placed by ÒideÓ(i.e.,fluoride,chloride,bromide,iodide).
In the IUPAC system,alkyl halides are named as substituted alkanes. The substituent
prefix names for the halogens end with 
ÒoÓ(i.e.,Òfluoro,ÓÒchloro,ÓÒbromo,ÓÒiodoÓ).Therefore,alkyl halides are often called haloalkanes.
PROBLEM 10Give two names for each of the following compounds,and tell whether each alkyl halide is
primary,secondary,or tertiary:
a.c.
b.d.
CH3CHCH3FCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH2ClCH3BrCH3CH2CHCH3ClCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CHCH3BrCH32-bromo-5-methylheptaneCH3CH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2ClCH31-chloro-5,5-dimethylhexane4-bromo-2-chloro-1-methylcyclohexaneCH3BrCl1-ethyl-2-iodocyclopentaneCH2CH3IRCH
2Bra primary alkyl halide RCH
Bra secondary carbona primary carbona secondary alkyl halideRRCBrRa tertiary alkyl halideRa tertiary carbonmethyl fluorideCH3Fmethyl chlorideCH3Clmethyl bromideCH3Brmethyl iodideCH3ISection 2.4Nomenclature of Alkyl Halides
73The number of alkyl groups attached to
the carbon to which the halogen is
bonded determines whether an alkyl
halide is primary, secondary, or tertiary.
CH3Clchloromethanecommon name:systematic name:CH3CH2FfluoroethaneCH3CHICH32-iodopropaneCH3CH2CHBrCH32-bromobutanemethyl chlorideethyl fluorideisopropyl iodidesec-butyl bromideBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 73
PROBLEM 11Draw the structures and provide systematic names for a
Ðc by substituting a chlorine for ahydrogen of methylcyclohexane:
a.a primary alkyl halideb.a tertiary alkyl halidec.three secondary alkyl halides
2.5Nomenclature of Ethers
Ethersare compounds in which an oxygen is bonded to two alkyl substituents. If the
alkyl substituents are identical,the ether is a 
symmetrical ether. If the substituentsare different,the ether is an 
unsymmetrical ether.The common name of an ether consists of the names of the two alkyl substituents
(in alphabetical order),followed by the word 
Òether.
ÓThe smallest ethers are almostalways named by their common names.
The IUPAC system names an ether as an alkane with an RO substituent. The sub-
stituents are named by replacing the ÒylÓending in the name of the alkyl substituent
with Òoxy.
ÓPROBLEM 12a.Give the systematic (IUPAC) name for each of the following ethers:
1.3.
2.4.CH
3CH2CH2OCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2OCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3OCH2CH3CH3CHOCH2CH2CH2CH2OCHCH3CH3CH31,4-diisopropoxybutanemethoxyethoxy
isopropoxysec-butoxy2-methoxybutane1-ethoxy-3-methylpentane
tert-butoxyCH3OCH
3CH2OCH
3CHOCH3CH3CH2CHOCH3CH3CHCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2OCH2CH3CH3CH3COCH3CH3CH3CHOCHCH2CH3CH3CH3sec-butyl isopropyl etherCH3CH3CHCH2OCCH3CH3tert-butyl isobutyl etherCH3CH3OCH2CH3ethyl methyl etherCH3CH2OCH2CH3diethyl etheroften called ethyl etherCH3CHCH2CH2OCH3cyclohexyl isopentyl etherRRRR
«Oa symmetrical etherOan unsymmetrical ether74CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsChemists sometimes neglect the prefix
ÒdiÓ when they name symmetricalethers. Try not to make this oversight a

habit.Tutorial:
Nomenclature of ethersdimethyl etherdiethyl etherBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 74
5.6.
b.Do all of these ethers have common names?
c.What are their common names?
2.6Nomenclature of Alcohols
Alcohols are compounds in which a hydrogen of an alkane has been replaced by an
OH group. 
Alcoholsare classified as 
primary,secondary,or 
tertiary,depending on
whether the OH group is bonded to a primary,secondary,or tertiary carbon
Ñthe sameway alkyl halides are classified.
The common name of an alcohol consists of the name of the alkyl group to which
the OH group is attached,followed by the word 
Òalcohol.ÓThe functional group
is the center of reactivity in a molecule. In an alcohol,the
OH is the functional group. The IUPAC system uses a suffix to denote certain func-

tional groups. The systematic name of an alcohol,for example,is obtained by replac-

ing the ÒeÓat the end of the name of the parent hydrocarbon with the suffix 
Òol.ÓWhen necessary,the position of the functional group is indicated by a number im-
mediately preceding the name of the alcohol or immediately preceding the suffix. The

most recently approved IUPAC names are those with the number immediately preced-

ing the suffix. However,names with the number preceding the name of the alcohol

have been in use for a long time,so those are the ones most likely to appear in the lit-

erature,on reagent bottles,and on standardized tests. They will also be the ones that

appear most often in this book.The following rules are used to name a compound that has a functional group
suffix:
1.The parent hydrocarbon is the longest continuous chain 
containing the function-al group.
CH3CH2CHCH2CH3OH3-pentanolorpentan-3-olCH3OHmethanolCH3CH2OHethanolCH3CH3CH2OHethyl alcoholCH3CH2CH2OHpropyl alcoholCH3CHOHisopropyl alcoholCH3CH3CH3CCH2OHneopentyl alcoholCH2ROHCH
OHOH
a secondary alcoholCa tertiary alcohola primary alcoholRRRRRCH3CH3CH3CHOCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CHOCHCH2CH2CH3Section 2.6Nomenclature of Alcohols
75methyl alcoholethyl alcoholpropyl alcoholThe number of alkyl groups attached to
the carbon to which the OH group is

attached determines whether an alcohol
is primary, secondary, or tertiary.
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 75
76CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compounds2.The parent hydrocarbon is numbered in the direction that gives the 
functionalgroup suffix the lowest possible number.
3.If there is a functional group suffix and a substituent,the functional group suffix
gets the lowest possible number.
4.If the same number for the functional group suffix is obtained in both directions,
the chain is numbered in the direction that gives a substituent the lowest possible

number. Notice that a number is not needed to designate the position of a func-

tional group suffix in a cyclic compound,because it is assumed to be at the 

1-position.5.If there is more than one substituent,the substituents are cited in alphabetical
order.
Remember that the name of a substituent is stated before
the name of the par-ent hydrocarbon,and the functional group suffix is stated 
afterthe name of theparent hydrocarbon.[substituent] [parent hydrocarbon] [functional group suffix]
CH3CHCH2CHCH2CHCH36-bromo-4-ethyl-2-heptanol2-ethyl-5-methylcyclohexanol3,4-dimethylcyclopentanolBrCH2CH3OHCH2CH3OHHOCH3CH3H3CCH3CHCHCH2CH32-chloro-3-pentanolnot4-chloro-3-pentanol2-methyl-4-heptanolnot6-methyl-4-heptanolClOH
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CHCH3OHCH
33-methylcyclohexanolnot5-methylcyclohexanolOHCH3OHHOCH2CH2CH2Br4-chloro-2-butanol3-bromo-1-propanol312ClCH2CH2CHCH32431
OHCH3CH34,4-dimethyl-2-pentanolCH2CCH2CHCH324531
12344
5321321
CH3CHCH2CH3OH2-butanolorbutan-2-olCH3CH2CH2CHCH2OHCH2CH32-ethyl-1-pentanolor2-ethylpentan-1-olThe longest continuous chainhas six carbons, but the longest
continuous chain containing the
OH functional group has five
carbons so the compound is
named as a pentanol.The longest continuous chainhas four carbons, but the longest
continuous chain containing the
OH functional group has three
carbons, so the compound is
named as a propanol.CH3CH2CH2CH2OCH2CH2CH2OH3-butoxy-1-propanolor3-butoxypropan-1-olWhen there is only a substituent, the
substituent gets the lowest possible
number.
When there is only a functional group
suffix, the functional group suffix gets

the lowest possible number.
When there is both a functional group
suffix and a substituent, the functional

group suffix gets the lowest possible

number.
Tutorial:
Nomenclature of alcoholsBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 76
Section 2.7Nomenclature of Amines
77PROBLEM 13Draw the structures of a homologous series of alcohols that have from one to six carbons,
and then give each of them a common name and a systematic name.
PROBLEM 14Give each of the following compounds a systematic name,and indicate whether each is a

primary,secondary,or tertiary alcohol:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 15Write the structures of all the tertiary alcohols with molecular formula and give
each a systematic name.2.7Nomenclature of Amines
Amines are compounds in which one or more of the hydrogens of ammonia have been
replaced by alkyl groups. Smaller amines are characterized by their fishy odors. Fer-

mented shark,for example,a traditional dish in Iceland,smells exactly like trieth-

ylamine. There are 
primary amines,secondary amines,and 
tertiary amines. Theclassification depends on how many alkyl groups are bonded to the nitrogen. Primary

amines have one alkyl group bonded to the nitrogen,secondary amines have two,and

tertiary amines have three.
Notice that the number of alkyl groups 
attached to the nitrogen
determines whether anamine is primary,secondary,or tertiary. For an alkyl halide or an alcohol,on the other

hand,the number of alkyl groups 
attached to the carbon
to which the halogen or the
OH is bonded determines the classification (Sections 2.4 and 2.6).
The common name of an amine consists of the names of the alkyl groups bonded to
the nitrogen,in alphabetical order,followed by 
Òamine.ÓThe entire name is written asCRClCOH
NH2carbon is attachedto three alkyl groupsa tertiary alkyl chloridea tertiary alcohol
a primary aminenitrogen is attachedto one alkyl groupRRRRRCRRRNH2NH3RRNH
a secondary amineNa tertiary aminea primary amineammoniaRRRRC6H14O,CH3CH2OHClOHCH3CH3CCH2CH2CH2ClCH3CH3OHCH3CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3HOCH3OHCH3CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OHThe number of alkyl groups attached to
the nitrogen determines whether an

amine is primary, secondary, or tertiary.
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 77
78CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compoundsone word (unlike the common names of alcohols,ethers,and alkyl halides,in which
Òalcohol,ÓÒether,
Óand ÒhalideÓare separate words).
The IUPAC system uses a suffix to denote the amine functional group. The 
ÒeÓatthe end of the name of the parent hydrocarbon is replaced by 
ÒamineÓÑsimilar to theway in which alcohols are named. A number identifies the carbon to which the nitro-

gen is attached. The number can appear before the name of the parent hydrocarbon or

before Òamine.ÓThe name of any alkyl group bonded to nitrogen is preceded by an
ÒNÓ(in italics) to indicate that the group is bonded to a nitrogen rather than to a
carbon.The substituentsÑregardless of whether they are attached to the nitrogen or to the
parent hydrocarbon
Ñare listed in alphabetical order,and then a number or an 
ÒNÓisassigned to each one. The chain is numbered in the direction that gives the functional

group suffix the lowest possible number.
Nitrogen compounds with four alkyl groups bonded to the nitrogen
Ñthereby giv-
ing the nitrogen a positive formal charge
Ñare called quaternary ammonium salts
.Their names consist of the names of the alkyl groups in alphabetical order,followed

by ÒammoniumÓ(all in one word),and then the name of the counterion as a separate
word.
Table2.3summarizes the ways in which alkyl halides,ethers,alcohols,and amines
are named.CH3NCH3HOCH3CH3NCH3CH3ClCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2tetramethylammonium hydroxideethyldimethylpropylammonium chloride
3-chloro-N-methyl-1-butanamine2-ethyl-N-propylcyclohexanamineCH3CHCH2CH2NHCH34321
N-ethyl-5-methyl-3-hexanamineCH3CH2CHCH2CHCH3123456
NHCH2CH3NHCH2CH2CH3ClCH3CH2CH34-bromo-N,N-dimethyl-2-pentanamineCH3CHCH2CHCH354321
CH3NCH3BrCH3CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH31-butanamineorbutan-1-amineN-ethyl-3-hexanamineorN-ethylhexan-3-amineNHCH2CH3N-ethyl-N-methyl-1-propanamineorN-ethyl-N-methylpropan-1-amineCH3CH2CH2NCH2CH3CH34321123456321
CH3NH2CH3NCH3CH3methylamineCH3NHCH2CH2CH3methylpropylaminetrimethylamineCH3NCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3butyldimethylamineCH3CH2NCH2CH2CH3CH3ethylmethylpropylamineCH3CH2NHCH2CH3diethylamineBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 78
Section 2.7Nomenclature of Amines
79PROBLEM 16Give common and systematic names for each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.PROBLEM 17Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.2-methyl-
N-propyl-1-propanamined.methyldipropylamine
b.N-ethylethanaminee.
N,N-dimethylpentan-3-aminec.5-methylhexan-1-aminef.cyclohexylethylmethylamine
PROBLEM 18For each of the following compounds,give the systematic name and the common name
(for those that have common names),and indicate whether the amines are primary,

secondary,or tertiary:
a.c.b.d.
CH3NH2H3CCH3CH2CH2NHCH2CH2CHCH3CH3(CH3CH2)2NCH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH3CHCH2NHCHCH2CH3CH3CH3NH2CH3CH2CH2NHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2Table 2.3Summary of Nomenclature
Systematic nameCommon name
Alkyl halidesubstituted alkanealkyl group to which halogen is attached,plus 
halidebromomethanemethyl bromide
chloroethaneethyl chloride
Ethersubstituted alkanealkyl groups attached to oxygen,plus 
ethermethoxymethanedimethyl ether
methoxyethaneethyl methyl ether
Alcoholfunctional group suffix is 
olalkyl group to which OH is attached,plus 
alcoholmethanolmethyl alcohol
ethanolethyl alcohol
Aminefunctional group suffix is 
aminealkyl groups attached to N,plus 
amineethanamineethylamine
N-methyl-1-propanaminemethylpropylamine
CH3CH2CH2NHCH3CH3CH2CH2NHCH3CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2OHCH3CH2OHCH3OHCH3OHCH3CH2OCH3CH3CH2OCH3CH3OCH3CH3OCH3CH3CH2ClCH3CH2ClCH3BrCH3BrTutorial:
Summary of systematic
nomenclatureBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 79
80CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compounds2.8Structures of Alkyl Halides, Alcohols, Ethers, 
and AminesThe bond (where X denotes a halogen) of an alkyl halide is formed from the
overlap of an orbital of carbon with an orbital of the halogen (Section1.13).

Fluorine uses a orbital,chlorine a orbital,bromine a orbital,and

iodinea orbital. Because the electron density of the orbital decreases with increas-

ing volume,the bond becomes longer and weaker as the size of the halogen in-

creases (Table2.4). Notice that this is the same trend shown by the bond

(Table1.6,page 36).
The oxygen of an alcohol has the same geometry it has in water (Section1.11). In
fact,an alcohol molecule can be thought of as a water molecule with an alkyl group in

place of one of the hydrogens. The oxygen atom in an alcohol is hybridized,as itis

in water. One of the orbitals of oxygen overlaps an orbital of a carbon,one 

orbital overlaps the 
sorbital of a hydrogen,and the other two orbitals each contain
a lone pair.
The oxygen of an ether also has the same geometry it has in water. An ether molecule
can be thought of as a water molecule with alkyl groups in place of both hydrogens.
Oan alcoholelectrostatic potential
map for methanolHRsp3 hybridizedsp3sp3sp3sp3sp3HXCX5sp34sp33sp32sp3sp3sp3CXCarbonÐHalogen Bond Lengths and Bond Strengths
BondlengthsBond strength      
Orbital interactionskcal/molkJ/mol
H3F108451
H3Cl84350
H3Br70294
H3I57239IHHHCCCC2.14 AIBrHHH1.93 ABrClHHH1.78 AClHHHF1.39 AFCCCCCCCCTable 2.4
Tutorial:
Functional groupsBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 80
The nitrogen of an amine has the same geometry it has in ammonia (Section1.12).
One,two,or three hydrogens may be replaced by alkyl groups. The number of hydro-

gens replaced by alkyl groups determineswhether the amine is primary,secondary,or

tertiary (Section 2.7).PROBLEM 19Predict the approximate size of the following angles. (
Hint:See Sections1.11and 1.12.)
a.the bond angle in an ether
b.the bond angle in a secondary amine

c.the bond angle in an alcohol

d.the bond angle in a quaternary ammonium salt
2.9Physical Properties of Alkanes, Alkyl Halides, 
Alcohols, Ethers, and AminesBoiling PointsThe boiling point (bp)of a compound is the temperature at which the liquid form of
the compound becomes a gas (vaporizes). In order for a compound to vaporize,the

forces that hold the individual molecules close to each other in the liquid must be over-

come. This means that the boiling point of a compound depends on the strength of the

attractive forces between the individual molecules. If the molecules are held together

by strong forces,it will take a lot of energy to pull the molecules away from each other

and the compound will have a high boiling point. In contrast,if the molecules are held

together by weak forces,only a small amount of energy will be needed to pull the mol-

ecules away from each other and the compound will have a low boiling point.
CNCCOHCNCCOCHHCH3CH3CH3CH3methylaminea primary aminesp3 hybridizeddimethylaminea secondary amineHNCH3NCH3Ntrimethylaminea tertiary amineelectrostatic potential maps formethylaminedimethylaminetrimethylamine
an etherelectrostatic potentialmap for dimethyl ethersp3 hybridizedORRSection 2.9Physical Properties of Alkanes, Alkyl Halides, Alcohols, Ethers, and Amines
813-D Molecules:Methylamine;
Dimethylamine;
Trimethylamine
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 81
82CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsRelatively weak forces hold alkane molecules together. Alkanes contain only car-
bon and hydrogen atoms. Because the electronegativities of carbon and hydrogen are

similar,the bonds in alkanes are nonpolar. Consequently,there are no significant par-

tial charges on any of the atoms in an alkane.
It is,however,only the average charge distribution over the alkane molecule that is
neutral. Electrons are moving continuously,so at any instant the electron density on

one side of the molecule can be slightly higher than that on the other side,giving the

molecule a temporary dipole.A temporary dipole in one molecule can induce a temporary dipole in a nearby
molecule. As a result,the negative side of one molecule ends up adjacent to the posi-

tive side of another molecule,as shown in Figure2.1. Because the dipoles in the mol-

ecules are induced,the interactions between the molecules are called 
induced-dipoleÐinduced-dipole interactions. The molecules of an alkane are held together by these
induced-dipoleÐinduced-dipole interactions,which are knownas 
van der Waals
forces
. Van der Waals forces are the weakest of all the intermolecular attractions.
In order for an alkane to boil,the van der Waals forces must be overcome. The
magnitude of the van der Waals forces that hold alkane molecules together depends

on the area of contact between the molecules. The greater the area of contact,the

stronger are the van der Waals forces and the greater is the amount of energy needed

to overcome those forces. If you look at the homologous series of alkanes in

Table2.1,you will see that the boiling points of alkanes increase as their size in-

creases. This relationship holds because each additional methylene group increases

the area of contact between the molecules. The four smallest alkanes have boiling

points below room temperature (room temperature is about 25 
¡C),so they exist as
gases at room temperature. Pentane is the smallest alkane that is a

liquid at room temperature.Because the strength of the van der Waals forces depends on the area of contact be-
tween the molecules,branching in a compound lowers its boiling point because it re-

duces the area of contact. A branched compound has a more compact,nearly spherical

shape. If you think of the unbranched alkane pentane as a cigar and branched neopen-
tane as a tennis ball,you can see that branching decreases the area of contact between

molecules:Two cigars make contact over a greater area than do two tennis balls. Thus,

if two alkanes have the same molecular weight,the more highly branched alkane will

have a lower boiling point.
The boiling points of the compounds in any homologous series increase as their
molecular weights increase because of the increase in van der Waals forces. So the

boiling points of the compounds in a homologous series of ethers,alkyl halides,

alcohols,and amines increase with increasing molecular weight. (See Appendix I.)
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3pentanebp  36.1 CCH3CHCH2CH3isopentanebp  27.9 CCH3CH3CCH3neopentanebp  9.5 CCH3CH3(bp36.1 ¡C)Johannes Diderik van der Waals
(1837Ð1923)was a Dutch physicist.
He was born in Leiden,the son of a

carpenter,and was largely self-taught

when he entered the University of

Leiden,where he earned a Ph.D. He

was a professor of physics at the

University of Amsterdam from 1877

to 1903. He won the 1910 Nobel
Prize for his research on the gaseous

and liquid states of matter.
Figure 2.1
Van der Waals forces are induced-
dipoleÐinduced-dipole interactions.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 82
Section 2.9Physical Properties of Alkanes, Alkyl Halides, Alcohols, Ethers, and Amines
83Theboiling points of these compounds,however,are also affected by the polar char-
acter of the bond (where Z denotes N,O,F,Cl,or Br) because nitrogen,oxy-

gen,and the halogens are more electronegative than the carbon to which they are

attached.The magnitude of the charge differential between the two bonded atoms is indicated
by the bond dipole moment (Section1.3).
Molecules with dipole moments are attracted to one another because they can align
themselves in such a way that the positive end of one dipole is adjacent to the negative

end of another dipole. These electrostatic attractive forces,called 
dipoleÐdipole interac-tions,are stronger than van der Waals forces,but not as strong as ionic or covalent bonds.
Ethers generally have higher boiling points than alkanes of comparable molecular
weight because both van der Waals forces and dipole
Ðdipole interactions must be
overcome for an ether to boil (Table2.5).
As the table shows,alcohols have much higher boiling points than alkanes or ethers
of comparable molecular weight because,in addition to van der Waals forces and the

dipoleÐdipole interactions of the bond,alcohols can form 
hydrogen bonds
. Ahydrogen bond is a special kind of dipole
Ðdipole interaction that occurs between a hy-drogen that is bonded to an oxygen,a nitrogen,or a fluorine and the lone-pair elec-

trons of an oxygen,nitrogen,or fluorine in another molecule.
The length of the covalent bond between oxygen and hydrogen is The hy-
drogen bond between an oxygen of one molecule and a hydrogen of another molecule
is almost twice as long (1.69
Ð1.79 ),which means that a hydrogen bond is not as
strong as an covalent bond. A hydrogen bond,however,is stronger than other
OH†0.96 †.COcyclopentanebp  49.3 Ctetrahydrofuranbp  65 COH3CNH
20.2 DH3CF1.6 DH3CBr
1.4 DH3CCl
1.5 DH3CCH
3O0.7 DH3CI1.2 DH3COH
0.7 DRCZZ 
N, O, F, Cl, or Br
CZTable 2.5Comparative Boiling Points (
¡C)AlkanesEthersAlcoholsAmines
7816.6
10.897.447.8
36.134.5117.377.8
CH3CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH30.5CH3CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2OHCH3OCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH323.742.1CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2OHCH3OCH3CH3CH2CH3The dipole moment of a bond is equal tothe magnitude of the charge on one of
the bonded atoms times the distance
between the bonded atoms.More extensive tables of physical prop-
erties can be found in Appendix I.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 83
dipoleÐdipole interactions. The strongest hydrogen bonds are linear
Ñthe two elec-
tronegative atoms and the hydrogen between them lie on a straight line.
Although each individual hydrogen bond is weak
Ñrequiring about (or
) to breakÑthere are many such bonds holding alcohol molecules together.
The extra energy required to break these hydrogen bonds is the reason alcohols have

much higher boiling points than either alkanes or ethers with similar molecular weights.The boiling point of water illustrates the dramatic effect hydrogen bonding has on boil-
ing points. Water has a molecular weight of 18 and a boiling point of 100
¡C. The alkane
nearest in size is methane,with a molecular weight of 16. Methane boils at 
Primary and secondary amines also form hydrogen bonds,so these amines have
higher boiling points than alkanes with similar molecular weights. Nitrogen is not as

electronegative as oxygen,however,which means that the hydrogen bonds between

amine molecules are weaker than the hydrogen bonds between alcohol molecules. An

amine,therefore,has a lower boiling point than an alcohol with a similar molecular

weight (Table 2.5).
Because primary amines have two bonds,hydrogen bonding is more signif-
icant in primary amines than in secondary amines. Tertiary amines cannot form hydro-

gen bonds between their own molecules because they do not have a hydrogen attached

to the nitrogen. Consequently,if you compare amines with the same molecular weight

and similar structures,you will find that primary amines have higher boiling points

than secondary amines and secondary amines have higher boiling points than tertiary

amines.PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
a.Which of the following compounds will form hydrogen bonds between its molecules?
1.2.3.
b.Which of these compounds form hydrogen bonds with a solvent such as ethanol?
Insolving this type of question,start by defining the kind of compound that will do what is
being asked.
a.A hydrogen bond forms when a hydrogen that is attached to an O,N,or F of one mole-
cule interacts with a lone pair on an O,N,or F of another molecule. Therefore,a com-

pound that will form hydrogen bonds with itself must have a hydrogen bonded to an O,

N,or F. Only compound 1 will be able to form hydrogen bonds with itself.
b.Ethanol has an H bonded to an O,so it will be able to form hydrogen bonds with a com-
pound that has a lone pair on an O,N,or F. Compounds 1 and 3 will be able to form hy-

drogen bonds with ethanol.Now continue on to Problem 20.
CH3OCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2SHCH3CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CHCH2NH2CH3CH3CH2CHNHCH3CH3CH3CH2NCH2CH3CH3a primary aminebp  97 Ca secondary aminebp  84 Ca tertiary aminebp  65 CNH167.7 ¡C.21 kJmol5 kcalmolhydrogen bondhydrogen bondhydrogen bonds1.69 Ð 1.79 †HHHHHOHHHHHNNHOHOHOHHHHHOHHHNHHHNFHHHOHOHOFHFH0.96 †hydrogen bonding in waterhydrogen bond84CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 84
PROBLEM 20a.Which of the following compounds will form hydrogen bonds between its molecules?
1.4.

2.5.

3.6.
b.Which of the preceding compounds form hydrogen bonds with a solvent such as
ethanol?PROBLEM 21Explain whya.has a higher boiling point than 
b.has a higher boiling point than 

c.has a higher boiling point than HF (20 
¡C).PROBLEM 22List the following compounds in order of decreasing boiling point:
Both van der Waals forces and dipole
Ðdipole interactions must be overcome in
order for an alkyl halide to boil. As the halogen atom increases in size,the size of its

electron cloud increases. As a result,both the van der Waals contact area and the

polarizabilityof the electron cloud increase.Polarizability
indicates how readily an electron cloud can be distorted. The larger
the atom,the more loosely it holds the electrons in its outermost shell,and the more

they can be distorted. The more polarizable the atom,the stronger are the van der Waals

interactions. Therefore,an alkyl fluoride has a lower boiling point than an alkyl chlo-

ride with the same alkyl group. Similarly,alkyl chlorides have lower boiling points than

alkyl bromides,which have lower boiling points than alkyl iodides (Table2.6).
PROBLEM 23List the following compounds in order of decreasing boiling point:
a.b.c.CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2BrOHOH
HOOH
OHOHNH2H2ONH3 (33 ¡C).H2OCH3OH (65 ¡C).H2OCH3CH2CH2CH2FCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2OCH2CH2OHCH3CH2N(CH3)2CH3CH2CH2NHCH3CH3CH2CH2COOHSection 2.9Physical Properties of Alkanes, Alkyl Halides, Alcohols, Ethers, and Amines
85Table 2.6Comparative Boiling Points of Alkanes and Alkyl Halides (
¡C)YHFClBrI
3.642.4
12.338.472.3

46.671.0102.5
32.578.4101.6130.5
36.162.8107.8129.6157.0
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2Y0.5CH3CH2CH2CH2Y2.542.1CH3CH2CH2Y37.788.6CH3CH2Y24.278.4161.7CH3YBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 85
86CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsMelting PointsThe melting point (mp)
is the temperature at which a solid is converted into a liquid.
If you examine the melting points of the alkanes in Table2.1,you will see that the

melting points increase (with a few exceptions) in a homologous series as the molecu-

lar weight increases. The increase in melting point is less regular than the increase in

boiling point because 
packing
influences the melting point of a compound. 
Packing
isa property that determines how well the individual molecules in a solid fit together in

a crystal lattice. The tighter the fit,the more energy is required to break the lattice and

melt the compound.In Figure2.2,you can see that the melting points of alkanes with even numbers of
carbon atoms fall on a smooth curve (the red line). The melting points of alkanes with

odd numbers of carbon atoms also fall on a smooth curve (the green line). The two

curves do not overlap,however,because alkanes with an odd number of carbon atoms

pack less tightly than alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms. Alkanes with an

odd number of carbon atoms pack less tightly because the methyl groups at the ends of

their chains can avoid those of another chain only by increasing the distance between

their chains. Consequently,alkane molecules with odd numbers of carbon atoms have

lower intermolecular attractions and correspondingly lower melting points.
SolubilityThe general rule that explains 
solubilityon the basis of the polarity of molecules isthat Òlike dissolves like.
ÓIn other words,polar compounds dissolve in polar solvents,
and nonpolar compounds dissolve in nonpolar solvents. This is because a polar solvent

such as water has partial charges that can interact with the partial charges on a polar

compound. The negative poles of the solvent molecules surround the positive pole of

the polar solute,and the positive poles of the solvent molecules surround the negative

pole of the polar solute. Clustering of the solvent molecules around the solute mole-

cules separates solute molecules from each other,which is what makes them dissolve.

The interaction between a solvent and a molecule or an ion dissolved in that solvent is

called solvation
.HHOOYZHHOsolvation of a polar compound(Y     Z) by waterHHHHO500501001502001510
Number of carbon atomsMelting point (C)1520
odd numberseven numbersFigure 2.2
Melting points of straight-chainalkanes. Alkanes with even
numbers of carbon atoms fall on a
melting-point curve that is higher
than the melting-point curve for
alkanes with odd numbers of
carbon atoms.Tutorial:
Solvation of polar compoundsBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 86
Oil from a 70,000-ton oil spill in1996 off the coast of Wales.
Section 2.9Physical Properties of Alkanes, Alkyl Halides, Alcohols, Ethers, and Amines
87Because nonpolar compounds have no net charge,polar solvents are not attracted to
them. In order for a nonpolar molecule to dissolve in a polar solvent such as water,the

nonpolar molecule would have to push the water molecules apart,disrupting their hy-

drogen bonding,which is strong enough to exclude the nonpolar compound. In con-

trast,nonpolar solutes dissolve in nonpolar solvents because the van der Waals

interactions between solvent and solute molecules are about the same as between

solvent
Ðsolvent and solute
Ðsolute molecules.Alkanes are nonpolar,which causes them to be soluble in nonpolar solvents and
insoluble in polar solvents such as water. The densities of alkanes (Table2.1) in-

crease with increasing molecular weight,but even a 30-carbon alkane such as tria-

contane (density at ) is less dense than water (density at
). This means that a mixture of an alkane and water will sepa-
rate into two distinct layers,with the less dense alkane floating on top. The Alaskan

oil spill of 1989,the Persian Gulf spill of 1991,and the even larger spill off the

northwest coast of Spain in 2002 are large-scale examples of this phenomenon.

(Crude oil is primarily a mixture of alkanes.)An alcohol has both a nonpolar alkyl group and a polar OH group. So is an alcohol
molecule nonpolar or polar? Is it soluble in a nonpolar solvent,or is it soluble in

water? The answer depends on the size of the alkyl group. As the alkyl group increas-

es in size,it becomes a more significant fraction of the alcohol molecule and the com-

pound becomes less and less soluble in water. In other words,the molecule becomes

more and more like an alkane. Four carbons tend to be the dividing line at room tem-

perature. Alcohols with fewer than four carbons are soluble in water,but alcohols with

more than four carbons are insoluble in water. In other words,an OH group can drag

about three or four carbons into solution in water.
The four-carbon dividing line is only an approximate guide because the solubility
of an alcohol also depends on the structure of the alkyl group. Alcohols with branched

alkyl groups are more soluble in water than alcohols with nonbranched alkyl groups

with the same number of carbons,because branching minimizes the contact surface of

the nonpolar portion of the molecule. So 
tert-butyl alcohol is more soluble than
n-butyl alcohol in water.
Similarly,the oxygen atom of an ether can drag only about three carbons into solu-
tion in water (Table2.7). We have already seen (photo on page52) that diethyl ether
Ñan ether with four carbonsÑis not soluble in water.
Low-molecular-weight amines are soluble in water because amines can form hy-
drogen bonds with water. Comparing amines with the same number of carbons,we

find that primary amines are more soluble than secondary amines because primary

amines have two hydrogens that can engage in hydrogen bonding. Tertiary amines,

like primary and secondary amines,have lone-pair electrons that can accept hydrogen

bonds,but unlike primary and secondary amines,tertiary amines do not have hydro-

gens to donate for hydrogen bonds. Tertiary amines,therefore,are less soluble in water

than are secondary amines with the same number of carbons.Alkyl halides have some polar character,but only the alkyl fluorides have an atom
that can form a hydrogen bond with water. This means that alkyl fluorides are the most

water soluble of the alkyl halides. The other alkyl halides are less soluble in water than

ethers or alcohols with the same number of carbons (Table2.8).
20 ¡C0.9982 gmL20 ¡C0.8097 gmLTable 2.7Solubilities of Ethers in Water
2 CÕssoluble
3 CÕssoluble
4 CÕsslightly soluble (10 g100g )
5 CÕsminimally soluble (1.0 g100g )
6 CÕsinsoluble (0.25 g100g )
H2OCH3CH2CH2OCH2CH2CH3H2OCH3CH2OCH2CH2CH3H2OCH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3OCH2CH3CH3OCH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 87
88CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsTable 2.8Solubilities of Alkyl Halides in Water
very solublesolubleslightly solubleslightly soluble
solubleslightly solubleslightly solubleslightly soluble
slightly solubleslightly solubleslightly solubleslightly soluble
insolubleinsolubleinsolubleinsoluble
CH3CH2CH2CH2ICH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2CH2FCH3CH2CH2ICH3CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2FCH3CH2ICH3CH2BrCH3CH2ClCH3CH2FCH3ICH3BrCH3ClCH3FCCFigure 2.3
A carbonÐcarbon bond is formed bythe overlap of cylindrically
symmetrical orbitals. Therefore,

rotation about the bond can occur
without changing the amount of
orbital overlap.sp3PROBLEM 24Rank the following groups of compounds in order of decreasing solubility in water:
a.b.PROBLEM 25In which of the following solvents would cyclohexane have the lowest solubility:pentanol,
diethyl ether,ethanol,or hexane?
2.10Conformations of Alkanes: Rotation About CarbonÐCarbon BondsWe have seen that a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond (a bond) is formed when an or-
bital of one carbon overlaps an orbital of a second carbon (Section1.7). Because 

bonds are cylindrically symmetrical (i.e.,symmetrical about an imaginary line con-

necting the centers of the two atoms joined by the bond),rotation about a

carbonÐcarbon single bond can occur without any change in the amount of orbital
overlap (Figure2.3). The different spatial arrangements of the atoms that result from

rotation about a single bond are called 
conformations
. A specific conformation is
called a conformer
.When rotation occurs about the carbon
Ðcarbon bond of ethane,two extreme con-
formations can resultÑa staggered conformation
and an eclipsed conformation. Aninfinite number of conformations between these two extremes are also possible.
Compounds are three dimensional,but we are limited to a two-dimensional sheet of
paper when we show their structures. Perspective formulas,sawhorse projections,and

Newman projections are methods chemists commonly use to represent on paper the

three-dimensional spatial arrangements of the atoms that result from rotation about a
bond. In a perspective formula
,solid lines are used for bonds that lie in the plane
of the paper,solid wedges for bonds protruding out from the plane of the paper,and

hatched wedges for bonds extending behind the paper. In a 
sawhorse projection
,youare looking at the carbon
Ðcarbon bond from an oblique angle. In a 
Newmanprojection
,you are looking down the length of a particular carbon
Ðcarbon bond. The
carbon in front is represented by the point at which three bonds intersect,and the car-

bon in back is represented by a circle. The three lines emanating from each of the

carbons represent its other three bonds. In discussing the conformations of alkanes,we
ssssp3sp3sCH3NH2OHHOCH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CH2ClCH
3CH2CH2CH2OHBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 88
Section 2.10Conformations of Alkanes: Rotation About Carbon
ÐCarbon Bonds89will use Newman projections because they are easy to draw and they do a good job of
representing the spatial relationships of the substituents on the two carbon atoms.
The electrons in a bond will repel the electrons in another bond if the
bonds get too close to each other. The 
staggered conformation
,therefore,is the most
stable conformation of ethane because the bonds are as far away from each

other as possible. The 
eclipsed conformation
is the least stable conformation becausein no other conformation are the bonds as close to one another. The extra ener-

gy of the eclipsed conformation is called torsional strain
. Torsional strain
is the namegiven to the repulsion felt by the bonding electrons of one substituent as they pass close

to the bonding electrons of another substituent. The investigation of the various confor-

mations of a compound and their relative stabilities is called 
conformational analysis
.Rotation about a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond is not completely free because of the
energy difference between the staggered and eclipsed conformers. The eclipsed con-

former is higher in energy,so an energy barrier must be overcome when rotation about

the carbonÐcarbon bond occurs (Figure2.4). However,the barrier in ethane is small
CHCHCHCHMelvin S. Newman (1908Ð1993)was born in New York. He received

a Ph.D. from Yale University in

1932 and was a professor of

chemistry at Ohio State University

from 1936 to 1973.
HHH606060HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHCCHHHHHHCCHHHHHHHHHHHHperspectiveformulassawhorseprojectionsNewmanprojectionsstaggered conformation for rotation about the carbonÐcarbonbond in ethaneeclipsed conformation for rotation about the carbonÐcarbonbond in ethaneeclipsed conformers060120staggered conformerseclipsed conformers180Degrees of rotation240300360Potential energy2.9 kcal/molor 12 kJ/molHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHFigure 2.4
Potential energy of ethane as a function of the angle of rotation about the carbonÐcarbon bond.3-D Molecule:Staggered and eclipsed
conformations of ethaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 89
90CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compoundsenough (2.9 kcalmol or 12 kJmol) to allow the conformers to interconvert millions
of times per second at room temperature. Because the conformers interconvert,they

cannot be separated.Figure2.4shows the potential energies of all the conformers of ethane obtained
during one complete 360¡rotation. Notice that the staggered conformers
are at ener-gy minima,whereas the 
eclipsed conformers
are at energy maxima.
Butane has three carbonÐcarbon single bonds,and the molecule can rotate about
each of them. In the following figure,staggered and eclipsed conformers are drawn for

rotation about the bond:
Note that the carbon in the foreground in a Newman projection has the lower
number. Although the staggered conformers resulting from rotation about the
bond in butane all have the same energy,the staggered conformers result-
ing from rotation about the bond do not have the same energy. The stag-

gered conformers for rotation about the bond in butane are shown below.
Conformer D,in which the two methyl groups are as far apart as possible,is more
stable than the other two staggered conformers (B and F). The most stable of the

staggered conformers (D) is called the anti conformer
,and the other two stag-
gered conformers (B and F) are called 
gauche(ÒgoeshÓ) conformers
. (AntiisGreek for Òopposite of
Ó; gauche
is French for Òleft.Ó) In the anti conformer,the
largest substituents are opposite each other; in a gauche conformer,they are adja-

cent. The two gauche conformers have the same energy,but each is less stable than

the anti conformer.
Anti and gauche conformersdo not have the same energy because of steric strain.
Steric strainis the strain (i.e.,the extra energy) put on a molecule when atoms or
groups are too close to one another,which results in repulsion between the electron
C-2C-3C-2C-3C-1C-2staggered conformation for rotationabout the C-1ÑC-2 bond in butaneHHHCH2CH3HHeclipsed conformation for rotationabout the C-1ÑC-2 bond in butaneHCH2CH3HHHHC-2C-1C-1C-2ball-and-stick model of butanethe C-2ÑC-3 bondbutanethe C-1ÑC-2 bondthe C-3
ÑC-4 bondCH3CH212CH23CH340AECBDFACH3H3CCH3H3CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3H3CH3CCH3HHHHHHHHHHHH
HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
gaucheantigauche
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 90
Section 2.10Conformations of Alkanes: Rotation About Carbon
ÐCarbon Bonds91clouds of these atoms or groups. For example,there is more steric strain in a gauche
conformer than in the anti conformer because the two methyl groups are closer togeth-

er in a gauche conformer. This type of steric strain is called a 
gauche interaction.The eclipsed conformers resulting from rotation about the bond in bu-
tane also have different energies. The eclipsed conformer in which the two methyl

groups are closest to each other (A) is less stable than the eclipsed conformers in
which they are farther apart (C and E). The energies of the conformers obtained from

rotation about the bond of butane are shown in Figure2.5. (The dihedral

angle is the angle between the and planes. Therefore,

the conformer in which one methyl group stands directly in front of the other
Ñtheleast stable conformerÑhas a dihedral angle of 0¡.) All the eclipsed conformers have
both torsional and steric strain
Ñtorsional strain due to bond
Ðbond repulsion and stericstrain due to the closeness of the groups. In general,steric strain in molecules increas-

es as the size of the group increases.Because there is continuous rotation about all the carbon
Ðcarbon single bonds in a
molecule,organic molecules with carbon
Ðcarbon single bonds are not static balls andsticksÑthey have many interconvertible conformers. The conformers cannot be sepa-
rated,however,because their small energy difference allows them to interconvert

rapidly.
The relative number of molecules in a particular conformation at any one time de-
pends on the stability of the conformation:The more stable the conformation,the

greater is the fraction of molecules that will be in that conformation. Most molecules,

therefore,are in staggered conformations,and more molecules are in an anti confor-

mation than in a gauche conformation. The tendency to assume a staggered conforma-

tion causes carbon chains to orient themselves in a zigzag fashion,as shown by the

ball-and-stick model of decane.ball-and-stick model of decaneCCCH3CH3CCC-2C-3C-2C-3Movie:Potential energy of butane
conformers060120180Dihedral angle240300360DCEAFB4 kJ/molPotential energyA0.9 kcal/mol3.8 kcal/mol16 kJ/mol4.5 kcal/mol19 kJ/mol4.5 kcal/mol19 kJ/molFigure 2.5
Potential energy of butane as a function of the degree of rotation about the bond. Green letters refer to the conformers (AÐF) shown on page 90.C-2C-33-D Molecule:DecaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 91
92CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsPROBLEM 26a.Draw all the staggered and eclipsed conformers that result from rotation about the
bond of pentane.b.Draw a potential-energy diagram for rotation of the bond of pentane through
360¡,starting with the least stable conformer.
PROBLEM 27Using Newman projections,draw the most stable conformer for the following:
a.3-methylpentane,considering rotation about the bond
b.3-methylhexane,considering rotation about the bond

c.3,3-dimethylhexane,considering rotation about the bond
2.11Cycloalkanes: Ring StrainEarly chemists observed that cyclic compounds found in nature generally had five- or
six-membered rings. Compounds with three- and four-membered rings were found

much less frequently. This observation suggested that compounds with five- and six-

membered rings were more stable than compounds with three- or four-membered rings.
In 1885,the German chemist Adolf von Baeyer proposed that the instability of
three- and four-membered rings was due to angle strain. We know that,ideally,an 

hybridized carbon has bond angles of 109.5
¡(Section1.7). Baeyer suggested that the
stability of a cycloalkane could be predicted by determining how close the bond angle

of a planar cycloalkane is to the ideal tetrahedral bond angle of 109.5
¡. The angles in
an equilateral triangle are 60
¡. The bond angles in cyclopropane,therefore,are com-
pressed from the ideal bond angle of 109.5
¡to 60¡,a 49.5
¡deviation. This deviation of
the bond angle from the ideal bond angle causes strain called angle strain.The angle strain in a three-membered ring can be appreciated by looking at theorbitals that overlap to form the bonds in cyclopropane (Figure2.6). Normal 

bonds are formed by the overlap of two orbitals that point directly at each other. In

cyclopropane,overlapping orbitals cannot point directly at each other. Therefore,the

orbital overlap is less effective than in a normal bond. The less effective orbital

overlap is what causes angle strain,which in turn causes the bond to be weaker

than a normal bond. Because the bonding orbitals in cyclopropane can
Õtpoint directly at each other,they have shapes that resemble bananas and,consequent-

ly,are often called 
banana bonds
. In addition to possessing angle strain,three-mem-
bered rings have torsional strain because all the adjacent bonds are eclipsed.
The bond angles in planar cyclobutane would have to be compressed from 109.5
¡to90¡,the bond angle associated with a planar four-membered ring. Planar cyclobutane
would then be expected to have less angle strain than cyclopropane because the bond

angles in cyclobutane are only 19.5
¡away from the ideal bond angle.
CHCCCCCCCCsp3sssp3C-3C-4C-3C-4C-2C-3C-2C-3C-2C-3good overlapstrong bonda.b.
poor overlapweak bondFigure 2.6
(a)Overlap of orbitals in a
normal bond. (b)Overlap of 

orbitals in cyclopropane.sp3ssp3banana bondsPROBLEM 28The bond angles in a regular polygon with 
nsides are equal toa.What are the bond angles in a regular octagon?
b.In a regular nonagon?
180¡360¡BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 92
Section 2.11Cycloalkanes: Ring Strain
93Baeyer predicted that cyclopentane would be the most stable of the cycloalkanes
because its bond angles (108
¡) are closest to the ideal tetrahedral bond angle. He pre-
dicted that cyclohexane,with bond angles of 120
¡,would be less stable and that as the
number of sides in the cycloalkanes increases,their stability would decrease.
Contrary to what Baeyer predicted,cyclohexane is more stable than cyclopentane.
Furthermore,cyclic compounds do not become less and less stable as the number of

sides increases. The mistake Baeyer made was to assume that all cyclic molecules are

planar. Because three points define a plane,the carbons of cyclopropane must lie in a

plane. The other cycloalkanes,however,are not planar. Cyclic compounds twist and

bend in order to attain a structure that minimizes the three different kinds of strain that

can destabilize a cyclic compound:
1.Angle strain
is the strain induced in a molecule when the bond angles are differ-
ent from the ideal tetrahedral bond angle of 109.5¡.2.Torsional strain
is caused by repulsion between the bonding electrons of one
substituent and the bonding electrons of a nearby substituent.3.Steric strain
is caused by atoms or groups of atoms approaching each other too
closely.
Although planar cyclobutane would have less anglestrain than cyclopropane,it
could have more torsional strain because it has eight pairs of eclipsed hydrogens,

compared with the six pairs of cyclopropane. So cyclobutane is not a planar

moleculeÑit is a bent molecule. One of its methylene groups is bent at an angle of
about 25¡from the plane defined by the other three carbon atoms. This increases the
angle strain,but the increase is more than compensated for by the decreased torsion-

al strain as a result of the adjacent hydrogens not being as eclipsed,as they would be

in a planar ring.If cyclopentane were planar,as Baeyer had predicted,it would have essentially no
angle strain,but its 10 pairs of eclipsed hydrogens would be subject to considerable

torsional strain. So cyclopentane puckers,allowing the hydrogens to become nearly

staggered. In the process,however,it acquires some angle strain. The puckered form

of cyclopentane is called the 
envelope conformation
because the shape resembles asquarish envelope with the flap up.
"planar" cyclopentanebond angles  108"planar" cyclohexanebond angles  120"planar" cycloheptanebond angles  128.6HIGHLY STRAINED
HYDROCARBONSOrganic chemists have been able to synthesize
some highly strained cyclic hydrocarbons,such as bicy-

clo[1.1.0]butane,cubane,and prismane.
1Philip Eaton,the
firstto synthesize cubane,recently also synthesized octanitro-
cubaneÑcubane with an group bonded to each of the
eight corners. This compound is expected to be the most power-

ful explosive known.
2bicyclo[1.1.0]butanecubaneprismaneNO21Bicyclo[1.1.0]butane was synthesized by David Lemal,Fredric Menger,and George Clark at the University of Wisconsin (
Journal of the
American Chemical Society
,1963,
85,2529). Cubane was synthesized by Philip Eaton and Thomas Cole,Jr.,at the University of Chicago
(Journal of the American Chemical Society
,1964,
86,3157). Prismane was synthesized by Thomas Katz and Nancy Acton at Columbia Uni-
versity (
Journal of the American Chemical Society
,1973,
95,2738).
2Mao-Xi Zhang,Philip Eaton,and Richard Gilardi,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
,2000,
39 (2),401.
cyclopropanecyclobutanecyclopentaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 93
94CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsVON BAEYER AND BARBITURIC ACIDJohann Friedrich Wilhelm Adolf von Baeyer
(1835Ð1917) was born in Germany. He discovered barbituric
acidÑthe first of a group of sedatives known as barbiturates
Ñin 1864 and named it after a woman named Barbara. Who

Barbara was is not certain. Some say she was his girlfriend,but

because Baeyer discovered barbituric acid in the same year that

Prussia defeated Denmark,some believe he named the acid

after Saint Barbara,the patron saint of artillerymen. Baeyer was

the first to synthesize indigo,the dye used in the manufacture of

blue jeans. He was a professor of chemistry at the University of

Strasbourg and later at the University of Munich. He received

the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1905 for his work in synthetic

organic chemistry.
OOOONHHNHNNHObarbituric acidindigoHNewman projection ofthe chair conformerchair conformer ofcyclohexane23CH2CH2HHHHH4632651HHHHHHHHHHHHH14H5ball-and-stick model of thechair conformer of cyclohexaneFigure 2.7
The chair conformer ofcyclohexane, a Newman projection
of the chair conformer, and a ball-

and-stick model showing that all
the bonds are staggered.PROBLEM 29The effectiveness of a barbiturate as a sedative is related to its ability to penetrate the non-
polar membrane of a cell. Which of the following barbiturates would you expect to be the

more effective sedative?
2.12Conformations of CyclohexaneThe cyclic compounds most commonly found in nature contain six-membered rings
because such rings can exist in a conformation that is almost completely free of strain.

This conformation is called the 
chair conformation
(Figure2.7). In the chair con-
former of cyclohexane,all the bond angles are 111
¡,which is very close to the ideal
tetrahedral bond angle of 109.5
¡,and all the adjacent bonds are staggered. The chair
conformer is such an important conformer that you should learn how to draw it:
1.Draw two parallel lines of the same length,slanted upward. Both lines should
start at the same height.OOONbarbitalNHCH32CHCH32CHOOONHHhexethalNHCH32CHCH3(CH242
CH)3-D Molecules:Cyclopropane; Cyclobutane;
CyclopentaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 94
2.Connect the tops of the lines with a V; the left-hand side of the V should be
slightly longer than the right-hand side. Connect the bottoms of the lines with an

inverted V; the lines of the V and the inverted V should be parallel. This com-

pletes the framework of the six-membered ring.
3.Each carbon has an axial bond and an equatorial bond. The 
axial bonds
(redlines) are vertical and alternate above and below the ring. The axial bond on one

of the uppermost carbons is up,the next is down,the next is up,and so on.
4.The 
equatorial bonds
(red lines with blue balls) point outward from the ring.
Because the bond angles are greater than 90
¡,the equatorial bonds are on a slant.
If the axial bond points up,the equatorial bond on the same carbon is on a down-

ward slant. If the axial bond points down,the equatorial bond on the same car-

bon is on an upward slant.
Notice that each equatorial bond is parallel to two ring bonds (two carbons over) and
parallel to the opposite equatorial bond.Remember that cyclohexane is viewed on edge. The lower bonds of the ring are in
front and the upper bonds of the ring are in back.PROBLEM 30Draw 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexamethylcyclohexane with
a.all the methyl groups in axial positions
b.all the methyl groups in equatorial positions
axial bondequatorial bondequatorial bondaxial
bondsSection 2.12Conformations of Cyclohexane
953-D Molecule:Chair cyclohexaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 95
96CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsTable 2.9Heats of Formation and Total Strain Energies of Cycloalkanes
ÒStrainlessÓHeat of formationheat of formationTotal strain energy
(kcalmol)(kJmol)(kcalmol)(kJmol)(kcalmol)(kJmol)
Cylopropane53.127.3114.2
Cyclobutane28.526.5110.9

Cyclopentane6.225.9

Cyclohexane00

Cycloheptane6.225.9

Cyclooctane9.740.6

Cyclononane12.652.7

Cyclodecane12.351.5

Cycloundecane11.246.9
226.454.1179.542.9205.949.2154.436.9185.444.3132.631.7164.839.4124.329.7143.934.4118.028.2123.429.5123.429.5102.924.677.018.482.419.76.861.114.612.7pull thiscarbon downpush thiscarbon upring flip265431654321Figure 2.8
The bonds that are axial in onechair conformer are equatorial in
the other chair conformer. The

bonds that are equatorial in one
chair conformer are axial in the
other chair conformer.
If we assume that cyclohexane is completely free of strain,we can calculate the
total strain energy of the other cyclo-

alkanes. Taking the 
heat of formationof cyclohexane (Table2.9) and dividing by 6
for its six groups gives us a value of (or ) for a

ÒstrainlessÓgroup (The heat of formation
is the heatgiven off when a compound is formed from its elements under standard conditions.)

We can now calculate the heat of formation of a 
ÒstrainlessÓcycloalkane by multiply-
ing the number of groups in its ring by The total strain in the

compound is the difference between its 
ÒstrainlessÓheat of formation and its actual
heat of formation (Table2.9). For example,cyclopentane has a 
ÒstrainlessÓheat of for-
mation of Because its actual heat of formation is
cyclopentane has a total strain energy of 6.2 kcalmol
(Multiplying by 4.184 converts kcal into kJ.)
PROBLEM 31Calculate the total strain energy of cycloheptane.
Cyclohexane rapidly interconverts between two stable chair conformations be-
cause of the ease of rotation about its carbon
Ðcarbon bonds. This interconversion is
known as 
ring flip(Figure2.8). When the two chair conformers interconvert,bonds
that are equatorial in one chair conformer become axial in the other chair conformer

and vice versa.
[18.424.66.2].18.4 kcalmol,54.9224.6 kcalmol.4.92 kcalmol.CH229.564.92.CH220.6 kJmol4.92 kcalmolCH2(angle straintorsional strainsteric strain)Bonds that are equatorial in one chair
conformer are axial in the other

chairconformer.
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 96
Section 2.12Conformations of Cyclohexane
97HHHHHHHHHHHHCH2CH2HHHHHHHHflagpole hydrogensball-and-stick model of the boatconformer of cyclohexaneNewman projection ofthe boat conformerboat conformer ofcyclohexaneFigure 2.9
The boat conformer of cyclohexane, a Newman projection of the boat conformer, and a
ball-and-stick model showing that some of the bonds are eclipsed.5.3 kcal/m22 kJ/m6.8 kcal/m28 kJ/m12.1 kcal/m
50.6 kJ/mhalf-chairenergychairchairtwist-boattwist-boatboathalf-chairFigure 2.10
The conformers of cyclohexaneÑand their relative energiesÑas onechair conformer interconverts to
the other chair conformer.
Cyclohexane can also exist in a 
boat conformation
,shown in Figure2.9. Like the
chair conformer,the boat conformer is free of angle strain. However,the boat con-

former is not as stable as the chair conformer because some of the bonds in the boat

conformer are eclipsed,giving it torsional strain. The boat conformeris further desta-

bilized by the close proximity of the flagpole hydrogens
(the hydrogens at the Òbow
Óand ÒsternÓof the boat),which causes steric strain.
The conformations that cyclohexane can assume when interconverting from one
chair conformer to the other are shown in Figure2.10. To convert from the boat con-

former to one of the chair conformers,one of the topmost carbons of the boat

conformer must be pulled down so that it becomes the bottommost carbon. When

the carbon is pulled down just a little,the 
twist-boat(or skew-boat
) conformer
isobtained. The twist-boat conformer is more stable than the boat conformer because

there is less eclipsing and,consequently,less torsional strain and the flagpole hydro-

gens have moved away from each other,thus relieving some of the steric strain.

When the carbon is pulled down to the point where it is in the same plane as the

sides of the boat,the very unstable 
half-chair conformer
is obtained. Pulling the
carbon down farther produces the 
chair conformer.
The graph in Figure2.10shows
the energy of a cyclohexanemolecule as it interconverts from one chair conformer

to the other; the energy barrier for interconversion is 12.1kcalmol (50.6 kJmol).

From this value,it can be calculated that cyclohexane undergoes ring flips

persecond at room temperature. In other words,the two chair conformers are in

rapid equilibrium.Because the chair conformers are the most stable of the conformers,at any instant
more molecules of cyclohexane are in chair conformations than in any other confor-

mation. It has been calculated that,for every thousand molecules of cyclohexane in
1053-D Molecule:Boat cyclohexaneBuild a model of cyclohexane, and con-vert it from one chair conformer to the

other. To do this, pull the topmost car-

bon down and push the bottommost
carbon up.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 97
98CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compoundsring flipCH3CH3the methyl group is inan equatorial positionthe methyl group isin an axial positionless stablechair conformermore stablechair conformerFigure 2.11
A substituent is in an equatorialposition in one chair conformer and
in an axial position in the other. The

conformer with the substituent in
the equatorial position is more
stable.CH2CH2HHHH31HCH3HH2methyl is anti to C-3CH2CH2H
HCH3H521HHHH654643equatorialsubstituentmethyl is anti to C-5Figure 2.12
An equatorial substituent on the C-1 carbon is anti to theC-3 and C-5 carbons.CH2CH2HHHH31Haxial substituentHCH3CH3HCH2CH2HHH51HHHH62methyl is gauche to C-3methyl is gauche to C-562Figure 2.13
An axial substituent on the C-1 carbon is gauche tothe C-3 and C-5 carbons.achair conformation,no more than two molecules are in the next most stable
conformationÑthe twist-boat.2.13Conformations of Monosubstituted CyclohexanesUnlike cyclohexane,which has two equivalent chair conformers,the two chair con-
formers of a monosubstituted cyclohexane such as methylcyclohexane are not equiva-

lent. The methyl substituent is in an equatorial position in one conformer and in an

axial position in the other (Figure2.11),because substituents that are equatorial in one

chair conformer are axial in the other (Figure2.8).
Build a model of methylcyclohexane,and convert it from one chair conformer

to the other.
The chair conformer with the methyl substituent in an equatorial position is the
more stable conformer because a substituent has more room and,therefore,fewer

steric interactions when it is in an equatorial position. This can be best understood by

examining Figure2.12,which shows that when the methyl group is in an equatorial

position,it is anti to the C-3 and C-5 carbons. Therefore,the substituent extends into

space,away from the rest of the molecule.
In contrast,when the methyl group is in an axial position,it is gauche to the C-3
and C-5 carbons (Figure2.13). As a result,there are unfavorable steric interactions be-

tween the axial methyl group and both the axial substituent on C-3 and the axial sub-

stituent on C-5 (in this case,hydrogens). In other words,the three axial bonds on the

same side of the ring are parallel to each other,so any axial substituent will be rela-

tively close to the axial substituents on the other two carbons. Because the interacting

substituents are on 1,3-positions relative to each other,these unfavorable steric inter-

actions are called 1,3-diaxial interactions. If you take a few minutes to build models,
you will see that a substituent has more room if it is in an equatorial position than if it
is in an axial position.Go to the Web site for three-
dimensional representations of the

conformers of cyclohexane.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 98
Section 2.13Conformations of Monosubstituted Cyclohexanes
99The gauche conformer of butane and the axial-substituted conformer of methylcy-
clohexaneare compared in Figure2.14. Notice that the gauche interaction is the same

in both
Ñan interaction between a methyl group and a hydrogen bonded to a carbon
gauche to the methyl group. Butane has one such gauche interaction and methylcyclo-

hexane has two.
HHHHCHHHHHHHHHH1,3-diaxial interactionsball-and-stick model3-D Molecule:Chair conformers of methyl-
cyclohexaneH2CHHHCH3HHHHHHHHHCH3HHgauche butaneaxialmethylcyclohexaneFigure 2.14
The steric strain of gauche butane is thesame as the steric strain between an axial
methyl group and one of its axial
hydrogens. Butane has one gauche
interaction between a methyl group and
a hydrogen; methylcyclohexane has two.Table 2.
10   Equilibrium Constants for Several Monosubstituted Cyclohexanes
                    at 25 
CSubstituentAxial
KeqEquatorialSubstituentAxial
KeqEquatorialCH3CHH11821CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CCH3CH3354800F1.5
CN1.4
Cl2.4
Br2.2
I2.2HO5.4
In Section2.10,we saw that the gauche interaction between the methyl groups of
butane caused the gauche conformer to be 0.9kcalmol (3.8 kJmol) less stable than

the anti conformer. Because there are two such gauche interactions in the chair con-

former of methylcyclohexane when the methyl group is in an axial position,this chair

conformer is 1.8kcalmol (7.5 kJmol) less stable than the chair conformer with the

methyl group in the equatorial position.Because of the difference in stability of the two chair conformers,at any one time
more monosubstituted cyclohexane molecules will be in the chair conformer with the

substituent in the equatorial position than in the chair conformer with the substituent

in the axial position. The relative amounts of the two chair conformers depend on the

substituent (Table2.10). The substituent with the greater bulk in the area of the 1,3-

diaxial hydrogens will have a greater preference for the equatorial position because it

will have stronger 1,3-diaxial interactions. For example,the equilibrium constant
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 99
100CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic CompoundsThe larger the substituent on a cyclo-hexane ring, the more the equatorial-

substituted conformer will be favored.
The cis isomer has its substituents onthe same side of the ring.for the conformers of methylcyclohexane indicates that 95% of methylcyclo-
hexane molecules have the methyl group in the equatorial position at 25 
¡C:In the case of tert-butylcyclohexane,where the 1,3-diaxial interactions are even more
destabilizing because a tert-butyl group is larger than a methyl group,more than
99.9% of the molecules have the 
tert-butyl group in the equatorial position.
PROBLEM 32The chair conformer of fluorocyclohexane is 0.25kcalmol(1.0kJmol) more stable
when the fluoro substituent is in the equatorial position than when it is in the axial posi-
tion. How much more stable is the anti conformer of 1-fluoropropane compared with a

gauche conformer?PROBLEM 33From the data in Table2.10,calculate the percentage of molecules of cyclohexanol that

have the OH group in the equatorial position.
PROBLEM 34Bromine is a larger atom than chlorine,but the equilibrium constants in Table2.10indicate

that a chloro substituent has a greater preference for the equatorial position. Suggest an ex-

planation for this fact.
2.14Conformations of Disubstituted CyclohexanesIf there are two substituents on a cyclohexane ring,both substituents have to be taken
into account when determining which of the two chair conformers is the more stable.

LetÕs start by looking at 1,4-dimethylcyclohexane. First of all,note that there are two
different dimethylcyclohexanes. One has both methyl substituents on the 
same sideofthe cyclohexane ring; it is called the 
cis isomer(cisis Latin for 
Òon this sideÓ). The
other has the two methyl substituents on 
opposite sides
of the ring; it is calledthetrans isomer(trans
is Latin for 
ÒacrossÓ). cis-1,4-Dimethylcyclohexane and
trans
-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane are called 
geometric isomersor cisÐtrans isomers:They have the same atoms,and the atoms are linked in the same order,but they differ

in the spatial arrangement of the atoms.First we will determine which of the two chair conformers of 
cis-1,4-dimethyl-cyclohexane is more stable. One chair conformer has one methyl group in anequatorial
cis-1,4-dimethylcyclohexanetrans-1,4-dimethylcyclohexanethe two methyl groups areon the same side of the ringthe two methyl groups areon opposite sides of the ringHHCH3CH3HHCH3CH3 % of equatorial conformer
1818110095% % of equatorial conformer
[equatorial conformer][equatorial conformer][axial conformer]100 eq[equatorial conformer][axial conformer]181eqThe trans isomer has its substituents onopposite sides of the ring.BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 100
Section 2.14Conformations of Disubstituted Cyclohexanes
101position and one methyl group in an axial position. The other chair conformer also has
one methyl group in an equatorial position and one methyl group in an axial position.

Therefore,both chair conformers are equally stable.
In contrast,the two chair conformers of 
trans
-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane have differ-
ent stabilities because one has both methyl substituents in equatorial positions and the
other has both methyl groups in axial positions.The chair conformer with both substituents in axial positions has four 1,3-diaxialinteractions,causing it to be about (15.1kJmol)

less stable than the chair conformer with both methyl groups in equatorial positions.

We can,therefore,predict that 
trans
-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane will exist almost entire-
ly in the more stable diequatorial conformation.Now let
Õs look at the geometric isomers of 1-tert-butyl-3-methylcyclohexane. Both
substituents of the cis isomer are in equatorial positions in one conformer and in axial
positions in the other conformer. The conformer with both substituents in equatorial

positions is more stable.cis-1-tert-butyl-3-methylcyclohexaneHHCH3HHCH3ring flipmore stableless stable
CCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CH3HHHCH3Hthis chair conformer hasfour 1,3-diaxial interactions40.9 kcalmol3.6 kcal molcis-1,4-dimethylcyclohexaneHHCH3axialCH3equatorialHCH3CH3Hring flipaxialequatorialtrans-1,4-dimethylcyclohexaneHHCH3CH3equatorialHCH3axialCH3axialHring flipmore stableless stable
equatorialBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 101
Both conformers of the trans isomer have one substituent in an equatorial position
and the other in an axial position. Because the 
tert-butyl group is larger than the
methyl group,the 1,3-diaxial interactions will be stronger when the 
tert-butyl group is
in the axial position. Therefore,the conformer with the 
tert-butyl group in the equato-
rial position is more stable.PROBLEM 35Which will have a higher percentage of the diequatorial-substituted conformer,compared
with the diaxial-substituted conformer:trans
-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane or 
cis-1-tert-butyl-
3-methylcyclohexane?
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Is the conformer of 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane with one methyl group in an equatorial posi-

tion and the other in an axial position the cis isomer or the trans isomer?To solve this kind of problem you need to determine whether the two substituents are
on the same side of the ring (cis) or on opposite sides of the ring (trans). If the bonds bear-

ing the substituents are both pointing upward or both pointing downward,the compound is

the cis isomer; if one bond is pointing upward and the other downward,the compound is

the trans isomer. Because the conformer in question has both methyl groups attached to

downward-pointing bonds,it is the cis isomer.
The isomer that is the most misleading when it is drawn in two dimensions is a
trans
-1,2-disubstituted isomer. At first glance,the methyl groups of 
trans
-1,2-dimethyl-cyclohexane appear to be oriented in the same direction,so you might think that the com-

pound is the cis isomer. Closer inspection shows,however,that one bond is pointed

upward and the other downward,so we know that it is the trans isomer. (If you build a

model of the compound,it is easier to see that it is the trans isomer.)
Now continue on to Problem 36.
Hdowndown
downCH3HCH3the cis isomerHupCH3CH3Hthe trans isomerIs this the cis isomer or the trans isomer?HCH3HCH3CCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3trans-1-tert-butyl-3-methylcyclohexaneHHCH3HHCH3ring flipmore stableless stable
102CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compounds3-D Molecule:trans-1-tert-butyl-3-methyl-cyclohexaneBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 102
PROBLEM 36Determine whether each of the following compounds is a cis isomer or a trans isomer:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM37
SOLVED
a.Draw the more stable chair conformer of 
cis-1-ethyl-2-methylcyclohexane.
b.Draw the more stable conformer of 
trans
-1-ethyl-2-methylcyclohexane.
c.Which is more stable,
cis-1-ethyl-2-methylcyclohexane or 
trans
-1-ethyl-2-methyl-cyclohexane?
SOLUTION TO 37a
If the two substituents of a 1,2-disubstituted cyclohexane are to be
on the same side of the ring,one must be in an equatorial position and the other must be in

an axial position. The more stable chair conformer is the one in which the larger of the two

substituents (the ethyl group) is in the equatorial position.PROBLEM 38For each of the following disubstituted cyclohexanes,indicate whether the substituents in

the two chair conformers would be both equatorial in one chair conformer and both axial

in the other orone equatorial and one axial in each of the chair conformers:a.cis-1,2-c.
cis-1,3-e.
cis-1,4-b.trans
-1,2-d.
trans
-1,3-f.
trans
-1,4-PROBLEM 39a.Calculate the energy difference between the two chair conformers of 
trans
-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane.
b.What is the energy difference between the two chair conformers of 
cis-1,4-dimethyl-cyclohexane?
2.15Conformations of Fused RingsWhen two cyclohexane rings are fused together,the second ring can be considered to
be a pair of substituents bonded to the first ring. As with any disubstituted cyclo-

hexane,the two substituents can be either cis or trans. If the cyclohexane rings are

drawn in their chair conformations,the trans isomer (with one substituent bond point-

ing upward and the other downward) will have both substituents in the equatorial
HCH3CH3HBrHHCH3HHCH3ClBrHHCH3HHCH3BrHHClBrSection 2.15Conformations of Fused Rings
103BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 103
104CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compoundsposition. The cis isomer will have one substituent in the equatorial position and one
substituent in the axial position. Trans-fused
cyclohexane rings,therefore,are more
stable than cis-fusedcyclohexane rings.
HHHHtrans-decalintrans-fused ringsmore stablecis-decalincis-fused ringsless stableequatorialequatorialequatorialaxialSummaryAlkanesare hydrocarbons
that contain only single bonds.
Their general molecular formula is Constituti-onal isomershave the same molecular formula,but their
atoms are linked differently. Alkanes are named by deter-

mining the number of carbons in their parent hydrocar-
bonÑthe longest continuous chain. Substituentsare listedin alphabetical order,with a number to designate their posi-

tion on the chain. When there is only a 
substituent,the sub-
stituent gets the lowest possible number; when there is only

a functional group suffix
,the functional group suffix gets
the lowest possible number; when there is both a functional

group suffix and a substituent,the functional group suffix

gets the lowest possible number. The 
functional group
isthe center of reactivity in a molecule.
Alkyl halides
and ethersare named as substituted alkanes.Alcoholsand aminesare named using a functional group suf-
fix. 
Systematic namescan contain numbers; commonnamesnever do. A compound can have more than one name,
but a name must specify only one compound. Whether alkyl

halides or alcohols are primary,secondary,or 
tertiaryde-pends on whether the X (halogen) or OH group is bonded to a

primary,secondary,or tertiary carbon. A 
primary carbonisbonded to one carbon,a 
secondary carbonis bonded to two
carbons,and a 
tertiary carbonis bonded to three carbons.
Whether amines are primary,secondary,or 
tertiaryde-pends on the number of alkyl groups bonded to the nitrogen.

Compounds with four alkyl groups bonded to nitrogen are

called quaternary ammonium salts
.The oxygen of an alcohol has the same geometry it has
in water; the nitrogen of an amine has the same geometry it

has in ammonia. The greater the attractive forces between

moleculesÑvan der Waals forces
,dipoleÐdipole interac-tions, hydrogen bonds
Ñthe higher is the 
boiling pointofthe compound. A 
hydrogen bond
is an interaction betweena hydrogen bonded to an O,N,or F and the lone pair of an

O,N,or F in another molecule. The boiling point increases

with increasing molecular weight of the homolog. Branch-CH22.ing lowers the boiling point. 
Polarizability
indicates theease with which an electron cloud can be distorted:Larger

atoms are more polarizable.Polar compounds
dissolve in 
polar solvents
,and
nonpolar compoundsdissolve in 
nonpolar solvents
. Theinteraction between a solvent and a molecule or an ion dis-

solved in that solvent is called 
solvation
. The oxygen of an
alcohol or an ether can drag about three or four carbons into

solution in water.
Rotation about a bond results in two extreme
conformations
that rapidly interconvert:
staggered
andeclipsed. A staggered conformer
is more stable thananeclipsed conformer
because of torsional strainÑrepulsion between pairs of bonding electrons. There can be

two different staggered conformers:The 
anti conformer
ismore stable than the gauche conformer
because of stericstrainÑrepulsion between the electron clouds of atoms or
groups. The steric strain in a gauche conformer is called a

gauche interaction.Five- and six-membered rings are more stable than
three- and four-membered rings because of 
angle strainthat results when bond angles deviate from the ideal bond

angle of 109.5
¡. In a process called ring flip,cyclohexane
rapidly interconverts between two stable chair conforma-

tions. Bondsthat are 
axialin one chair conformer are
equatorialin the other and vice versa. The chair conformer
with a substituent in the equatorial position is more stable,
because there is more room in an equatorial position. A

substituent in an axial position experiences unfavorable

1,3-diaxial interactions. In the case of disubstituted cyclo-
hexanes,the more stable conformer will have its larger sub-

stituent in the equatorial position. A 
cis isomerhas its two
substituents on the same side of the ring; a trans isomerhas its substituents on opposite sides of the ring. Cis and

trans isomers are called geometric isomersor cisÐtransisomers. Cyclohexane rings are more stable if they are
trans fusedthan cis fused.CCBRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 104
Problems105Key Terms
alcohol (p.64)
alkane (p.60)

alkyl halide (p.64)

alkyl substituent (p.63)

amine (p.64)

angle strain (p.92)

anti conformer (p.90)

axial bond (p.95)

banana bond (p.92)

boat conformation (p.97)

boiling point (bp) (p.81)

chair conformation (p.94)

cis fused (p.104)

cis isomer (p.100)

cisÐtrans isomers (p.100)
common name (p.63)

conformation (p.88)

conformational analysis (p.89)

conformer (p.88)

constitutional isomers (p.61)

cycloalkane (p.71)

1,3-diaxial interaction (p.98)

dipoleÐdipole interaction (p.83)
eclipsed conformation (p.89)

eclipsed conformer (p.90)

equatorial bond (p.95)

ether (p.74)

flagpole hydrogen (p.97)
functional group (p.75)
gauche conformer (p.90)

gauche interaction (p.91)

geometric isomers (p.100)

half-chair conformer (p.97)

heat of formation (p.96)

homolog (p.60)

homologous series (p.60)

hydrocarbon (p.60)

hydrogen bond (p.83)

induced-dipoleÐinduced-dipoleinteraction (p.82)
IUPAC nomenclature (p.63)

melting point (mp) (p.86)

methylene group (p. 60)

Newman projection (p.88)

packing (p.86)

parent hydrocarbon (p.67)

perspective formula (p.88)

polarizability (p.84)

primary alcohol (p.75)

primary alkyl halide (p.73)

primary amine (p.77)

primary carbon (p.64)

primary hydrogen (p.65)

quaternary ammonium salt (p.78)

ring flip (p.96)

sawhorse projection (p.88)
(CH2)secondary alcohol (p.75)
secondary alkyl halide (p.73)

secondary amine (p.77)

secondary carbon (p.64)

secondary hydrogen (p.65)

skeletal structure (p.71)

skew-boat conformer (p.97)

solubility (p.86)

solvation (p.86)

staggered conformation (p.89)

staggered conformers (p.90)

steric strain (p.90)

straight-chain alkane (p.60)

symmetrical ether (p.74)

systematic nomenclature (p.63)

tertiary alcohol (p.75)

tertiary alkyl halide (p.73)

tertiary amine (p.77)

tertiary carbon (p.65)

tertiary hydrogen (p.65)

torsional strain (p.89)

trans fused (p.104)

trans isomer (p.100)

twist-boat conformer (p.97)

unsymmetrical ether (p.74)

van der Waals forces (p.82)
Problems
40.Write a structural formula for each of the following compounds:
a.sec-butyl 
tert-butyl etherf.4,5-diisopropylnonanek.1-methylcyclopentanol
b.isoheptyl alcoholg.triethylaminel.3-ethoxy-2-methylhexane

c.sec-butylamineh.cyclopentylcyclohexanem.5-(1,2-dimethylpropyl)nonane
d.neopentyl bromidei.4-
tert-butylheptanen.3,4-dimethyloctane
e.1,1-dimethylcyclohexanej.5,5-dibromo-2-methyloctane
41.Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.e.i.
b.f.j.
c.g.k.
d.h.
BrCH3(CH3CH2)4CCH3OCH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3CH2CHOCH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CHCHCH3CH3CH3CH3OHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3OH(CH3)3CCH2CH2CH2CH(CH3)2NCH3CH3BrCH
2CH2CH2CH2CH2NHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3BrCH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 105
106CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compounds42.a.How many primary carbons does the following structure have?
b.How many secondary carbons does the structure have?
c.How many tertiary carbons does it have?
43.Which of the following conformers of isobutyl chloride is the most stable?
44.Draw the structural formula of an alkane that has
a.six carbons,all secondary

b.eight carbons and only primary hydrogens

c.seven carbons with two isopropyl groups
45.Give two names for each of the following compounds:
a.e.i.
b.f.j.
c.g.
d.h.
46.Which of the following pairs of compounds has
a.the higher boiling point:1-bromopentane or 1-bromohexane?

b.the higher boiling point:pentyl chloride or isopentyl chloride?

c.the greater solubility in water:1-butanol or 1-pentanol?

d.the higher boiling point:1-hexanol or 1-methoxypentane?

e.the higher melting point:hexane or isohexane?

f.the higher boiling point:1-chloropentane or 1-pentanol?

g.the higher boiling point:1-bromopentane or 1-chloropentane?

h.the higher boiling point:diethyl ether or butyl alcohol?

i.the greater density:heptane or octane?

j.the higher boiling point:isopentyl alcohol or isopentylamine?

k.the higher boiling point:hexylamine or dipropylamine?
47.Ansaid
¨and Motrin¨belong to the group of drugs known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Both are only
slightly soluble in water,but one is a little more soluble than the other. Which of the drugs has the greater solubility in wat
er?48.Al Kane was given the structural formulas of several compounds and was asked to give them systematic names. How many did Al
name correctly? Correct those that are misnamed.CH3CHCH2CHCOOHCH3CH3CHCOOHCH3FMotrinAnsaidBrCH3CH2CHCH3ClOHCH3CH2CHCH3NH2CH3CH2CH(CH3)NHCH2CH3CH2CH3CCH3CH3BrCH3CHCH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH3CH3CHNH2CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2OCH2CH3ClClClCH3CH3H3CCH3CH3CH3HHHHHHHHHCH3CH2CH3CH2CHCH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 106
Problems107a.4-bromo-3-pentanolg.3,3-dichlorooctane
b.2,2-dimethyl-4-ethylheptaneh.5-ethyl-2-methylhexane

c.5-methylcyclohexanoli.1-bromo-4-pentanol

d.1,1-dimethyl-2-cyclohexanolj.3-isopropyloctane

e.5-(2,2-dimethylethyl)nonanek.2-methyl-2-isopropylheptane

f.isopentyl bromidel.2-methyl-
N,N-dimethyl-4-hexanamine
49.Which of the following diaxial-substituted cyclohexanes has the highest energy?
50.Give systematic names for all the alkanes with molecular formula that do not have any secondary hydrogens.
51.Draw skeletal structures of the following compounds:
a.5-ethyl-2-methyloctaned.propylcyclopentane

b.1,3-dimethylcyclohexanee.2-methyl-4-(1-methylethyl)octane

c.2,3,3,4-tetramethylheptanef.2,6-dimethyl-4-(2-methylpropyl)decane
52.For rotation about the bond of 2-methylhexane:
a.Draw the Newman projection of the most stable conformer.

b.Draw the Newman projection of the least stable conformer.

c.About which other carbon
Ðcarbon bonds may rotation occur?d.How many of the carbon
Ðcarbon bonds in the compound have staggered conformers that are all equally stable?
53.Which of the following structures represents a cis isomer?
54.Draw all the isomers that have the molecular formula (
Hint:There are eight such isomers.)a.Give the systematic name for each of the isomers.d.How many of the isomers are primary alkyl halides?

b.Give a common name for each isomer that has one.e.How many of the isomers are secondary alkyl halides?

c.How many isomers do not have common names?f.How many of the isomers are tertiary alkyl halides?
55.Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.
56.Draw the two chair conformers of each compound,and indicate which conformer is more stable:
a.cis-1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexaned.
trans
-1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexane
b.trans
-1-ethyl-2-isopropylcyclohexanee.
cis-1-ethyl-3-isopropylcyclohexane
c.trans
-1-ethyl-2-methylcyclohexanef.
cis-1-ethyl-4-isopropylcyclohexane
57.Why are alcohols of lower molecular weight more soluble in water than those of higher molecular weight?

58.The most stable conformer of 
N-methylpiperidine is shown on p. 108.
a.Draw the other chair conformer.
OOHNH2ClOHC5H11Br.CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3ABCD
C-3C-4C7H16ABC
CH3CH3CH3ClClCl
BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 107
108CHAPTER 2An Intr
oduction to Organic Compoundsb.Which takes up more space,the lone-pair electrons or the methyl group?
59.How many ethers have the molecular formula Give the structural formula and systematic name for each. What are their
common names?60.Draw the most stable conformer of the following molecule:
61.Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.62.Calculate the energy difference between the two chair conformers of 
trans
-1,2-dimethylcyclohexane.
63.The most stable form of glucose (blood sugar) is a six-membered ring in a chair conformation with its five substituents all 
inequatorial positions. Draw the most stable form of glucose by putting the OH groups on the appropriate bonds in the chair

conformer.
64.Explain the following facts:
a.1-Hexanol has a higher boiling point than 3-hexanol.

b.Diethyl ether has very limited solubility in water,but tetrahydrofuran is essentially completely soluble.
65.One of the chair conformers of 1,3-dimethylcyclohexane has been found to be 5.4 kcalmol (or 23 kJmol) less stable than the
other. How much steric strain does a 1,3-diaxial interaction between two methyl groups introduce into the conformer?
66.Calculate the amount of steric strain in each of the chair conformers of 1,1,3-trimethylcyclohexane. Which conformer would
predominate at equilibrium?OtetrahydrofuranCH2OHCH2OHOHOHHOHOOOglucoseCH3CHCHCH2CH2CH2ClClCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH2CH3CCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CHCH3NHCH3CH3CH3CH3H3CC5H12O?NN-methylpiperidineCH3BRUI02-060_108r4  20-03-2003  11:48 AM  Page 108
109Five of thenext seven chapters cover
the reactions of hydrocarbonsÑcompounds
that contain only carbon and hydrogen.
The other two chapters treat topics that

are so important to the study of organic

reactions that each deserves its own chap-

ter. The first of these is stereochemistry

and the second is electron delocalization
and resonance.Chapter 3begins by looking at the structure and nomen-
clature of alkenesÑ
hydrocarbons that contain carbonÐ
carbon double bonds. Then some fundamental principles
that govern the reactions of organic compounds are intro-

duced. You will learn how to draw curved arrows to show

how electrons move during the course of a reaction as

new covalent bonds are formed and existing covalent

bonds are broken. This chapter also discusses the princi-

ples of thermodynamics and kineticsÑprinciples that are
central to an understanding of how and why organic reac-

tions take place.
Organic compounds can be divided into families,and for-
tunately,all members of a family react in the same way.

In Chapter 4,you will learn how the family of com-
pounds known as alkenes reacts and what kinds of prod-

ucts are formed from the reactions. Although many

different reactions are covered,you will see that they all

take place by a similar pathway.
Chapter 5is all about stereochemistry. Here,you will
learn about the different kinds of isomers that are possi-

ble for organic compounds. Then you will revisit the re-

actions that you learned in Chapter 4,to determine

whether the products of those reactions can exist as iso-

mers and,if so,which isomers are formed.
Chapter 6covers the reactions of alkynesÑ
hydrocarbons
that contain carbonÐcarbon triple bonds
. Because alkenes
and alkynes both have reactive carbonÐcarbon bonds,

you will discover that their reactions have many similari-

ties. This chapter will also introduce you to some of the

techniques chemists use to design syntheses of organic

compounds,and you will then have your first opportunity

to design a multistep synthesis.In Chapter 7,you will learn more about delocalized
electrons and the concept known as resonanceÑtopics

you were introduced to in Chapter1. Then you will see

how electron delocalization affects some of the things

with which you are already familiarÑacidity,the stabili-

ty of carbocations and radicals,and the reactions of

alkenes.
pHydrocarbons,Stereochemistry,
and ResonancePARTTWO
Chapter 3Alkenes: Structure,Nomenclature, and an Introduction to Reactivity ¥Thermodynamics and KineticsChapter 4Reactions of AlkenesChapter 5Stereochemistry: The Arrangement of Atoms in Space; The Stereochemistry of Addition ReactionsChapter 6Reactions of Alkynes¥Introductionto Multistep SynthesisChapter 7Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥More AboutMolecular Orbital TheoryChapter 8Reactions of Dienes¥Ultraviolet and Visible
SpectroscopyChapter 9Reactions of Alkanes¥ RadicalsBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 109
In Chapter 8,you will learn about the reactions of
dienesÑhydrocarbons that have two carbonÐcarbon
double bonds. You will see that if the two double bonds in
a diene are sufficiently separated,most reactions that

occur are identical to those of alkenes (Chapter4). If,

however,the double bonds are separated by only one sin-

gle bond,electron delocalization (Chapter7) plays an im-

portant role in the reactions of the compound. Notice how

this chapter combines many of the concepts and theories

introduced in previous chapters.
Chapter 9covers the reactions of alkanesÑ
hydrocarbons
that contain only single bonds
. In the previous chapters,
you saw that when an organic compound reacts,the

weakest bond in the molecule is the one that breaks first.

Alkanes,however,have only strong bonds. Knowing this,

you can correctly predict that alkanes undergo reactions

only under extreme conditions.
110BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 110
Z isomerof 2-buteneE isomerof 2-buteneIn Chapter2,you learned that alkanes are hydrocarbons that con-
tain only carbonÐcarbon singlebonds. Hydrocarbons that contain acarbonÐcarbon doublebond are called alkenes
. Early chemists notedthat an oily substance was formed when ethene the smallest

alkene,reacted with chlorine. On the basis of this observation,alkenes were

originally called olefins
(oil forming).Alkenes play many important roles in biology. Ethene,for example,is a plant hor-
moneÑa compound that controls the plantÕs growth and other changes in its tissues.

Ethene affects seed germination,flower maturation,and fruit ripening.
Insects communicate by releasing pheromonesÑchemical substances that other in-sects of the same species detect with their antennae. There are sex,alarm,and trail

pheromones,and many of these are alkenes. Interfering with an insectÕs ability to send

or receive chemical signals is an environmentally safe way to control insect popula-

tions. For example,traps with synthetic sex attractants have been used to capture such

crop-destroying insects as the gypsy moth and the boll weevil. Many of the flavors and

fragrances produced by certain plants also belong to the alkene family.
muscaluresex attractant of the houseflya-farnesenefound in the waxy coatingon apple skinslimonenefrom lemon andorange oils-phellandreneoil of eucalyptusmultifidenesex attractant ofbrown algaeb(H2CCH2),3AlkenesStructure, Nomenclature, and an Introduction to ReactivityThermodynamicsand Kinetics1113-D Molecules: Limonene; -Phellandrene;
MultifidenebEthene is the hormone thatcauses tomatoes to ripen.BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 111
3.1Molecular Formula and the Degree 
of UnsaturationIn Chapter2,you learned that the general molecular formula for a noncyclic alkane 
is You also learned that the general molecular formula for a cyclic alkane is
because the cyclic structure reduces the number of hydrogens by two. Noncyclic
compounds are also called acycliccompounds (ÒaÓis Greek for ÒnonÓor ÒnotÓ).The general molecular formula for an 
acyclic alkene
is also because,as a re-
sult of the carbon
Ðcarbon double bond,an alkene has two fewer hydrogens than an
alkane with the same number of carbon atoms. Thus,the general molecular formula

for a cyclic alkene
must be We can,therefore,make the following state-
ment:The general molecular formula for a hydrocarbon isminus two hy-
drogens for everybond and/or ring in the molecule
.Therefore,if we know the molecular formula of a hydrocarbon,we can deter-
mine how many rings and/or bonds it has because,for every 
twohydrogens thatare missing from the general molecular formula a hydrocarbon has either

a bond or a ring. For example,a compound with a molecular formula of 

needs four more hydrogens to become Consequently,the com-

pound has either (1)two double bonds,(2)a ring and a double bond,(3)two rings,

or (4)a triple bond. Remember that a triple bond consists of two bonds and a 

bond (Section1.9).
Because alkanes contain the maximum number of carbon
Ðhydrogen bonds possi-
bleÑthat is,they are saturated with hydrogen
Ñthey are called 
saturated hydrocar-
bons. In contrast,alkenes are called 
unsaturated hydrocarbons
,because they have
fewer than the maximum number of hydrogens. The total number of bonds and rings

in an alkene is called its 
degree of unsaturation
.PROBLEM 1SOLVED
Determine the molecular formula for each of the following:
a.a 5-carbon hydrocarbon with one bond and one ring
b.a 4-carbon hydrocarbon with two bonds and no rings

c.a 10-carbon hydrocarbon with one bond and two rings
d.an 8-carbon hydrocarbon with three bonds and one ring
SOLUTION TO 1a
For a 5-carbon hydrocarbon with no bonds and no rings,
A 5-carbon hydrocarbon with a degree of unsaturation of 2 has four
fewer hydrogens,because two hydrogens are subtracted for every bond or ring present in

the molecule. Its molecular formula,therefore,is C
5H8.pC5H12.CH22pppppCH3CHCHCH
3CH3CH2CH2CH3a saturated hydrocarbonan unsaturated hydrocarbon
pCH3(CH2)5CCHCH2CH3CH3CHCH(CH
2)3CHCH
2Several compounds with molecular formula C8H14sp(C8H282).C8H18C8H14pCH22,pCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CHCH
2an alkaneC5H12CnH2n2an alkeneC5H10CnH2na cyclic alkaneC5H10CnH2na cyclic alkeneC5H8CnH2n2pCH22,CH22.CH2CH2CH22.112CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ 
Thermodynamics and KineticsThe general molecular formula fora hydrocarbon is minus two

hydrogens for every bond or

ring present in the molecule.
PCnH2n2  ,BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 112
Section 3.2Nomenclature of Alkenes
113PROBLEM 2SOLVED
Determine the degree of unsaturation for the hydrocarbons with the following molecular
formulas:a.b.c.d.e.
SOLUTION TO 2a
For a 10-carbon hydrocarbon with no bonds and no rings,
Thus,a 10-carbon compound with molecular formula has six
fewer hydrogens. Its degree of unsaturation,therefore,is 3.
PROBLEM 3Determine the degree of unsaturation,and then draw possible structures,for compounds

with the following molecular formulas:
a.b.c.
3.2Nomenclature of Alkenes
The systematic (IUPAC) name of an alkene is obtained by replacing the 
ÒaneÓendingof the corresponding alkane with Òene.ÓFor example,a two-carbon alkene is called
ethene and a three-carbon alkene is called propene. Ethene also is frequently called by

its common name:ethylene.
Most alkene names need a number to indicate the position of the double bond. (The
four names above do not,because there is no ambiguity.) The IUPAC rules you learned

in Chapter2apply to alkenes as well:
1.The longest continuous chain containing the functional group (in this case,the
carbonÐcarbon double bond) is numbered in a direction that gives the functional
group suffix the lowest possible number. For example,1-butene signifies that the

double bond is between the first and second carbons of butene; 2-hexene signi-

fies that the double bond is between the second and third carbons of hexene.
Notice that 1-butene does not have a common name. You might be tempted to
call it Òbutylene,
Ówhich is analogous to 
Òpropylene
Ófor propene,but butylene is
not an appropriate name. A name must be unambiguous,and 
Òbutylene
Ócouldsignify either 1-butene or 2-butene.
2.The name of a substituent is cited before the name of the longest continuous
chain containing the functional group,together with a number to designate the

carbon to which the substituent is attached. Notice that the chain is still num-

bered in the direction that gives the 
functional group suffix
the lowest possible
number.
CH3CH2CHCH
21-butene1234CH3CHCHCH
2CH2CH32-hexene3456
21CH3CH2CH2CH2CCH2CH2CH32-propyl-1-hexene65432
1CH3CHCHCH
32-butene3421CH2the longest continuous chain has eight carbons but the longest continuous chain containing 
the functional group has six carbons, so the 
parent name of the compound is hexenecyclohexenecyclopenteneCH3CHCH
2propenepropyleneH2CCH
2etheneethylenesystematic name:common name:C4H6C3H4C3H6C10H16C10H22.CH22pC40H56C12H20C8H16C20H34C10H16Number the longest continuous chaincontaining the functional group in the

direction that gives the functional group

suffix the lowest possible number.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 113
114CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsSubstituents are cited in alphabetical
order.
3.If a chain has more than one substituent,the substituents are cited in alphabetical
order,using the same rules for alphabetizing that you learned in Section2.2. (The

prefixes 
di,tri,sec,and 
tertare ignored in alphabetizing,but 
iso,neo,and 
cycloare not ignored.) The appropriate number is then assigned to each substituent.
4.If the same number for the alkene functional group suffix is obtained in both di-
rections,the correct name is the name that contains the lowest substituent num-

ber. For example,2,5-dimethyl-4-octene is a 4-octene whether the longest

continuous chain is numbered from left to right or from right to left. If you num-

ber from left to right,the substituents are at positions 4 and 7,but if you number

from right to left,they are at positions 2 and 5. Of those four substituent num-

bers,2 is the lowest,so the compound is named 2,5-dimethyl-4-octene and 
not4,7-dimethyl-4-octene.5.In cyclic alkenes,a number is not needed to denote the position of the function-
al group,because the ring is always numbered so that the double bond is be-

tween carbons 1 and 2.In cyclohexenes,the double bond is between C-1 and C-2,regardless of
whether you move around the ring clockwise or counterclockwise. Therefore,

you move around the ring in the direction that puts the lowest substituent number

into the name,notin the direction that gives the lowest 
sumof the substituentnumbers. For example,1,6-dichlorocyclohexene is 
notcalled 2,3-dichlorocyclo-
hexene because 1,6-dichlorocyclohexene has the lowest substituent number (1),

even though it does not have the lowest sum of the substituent numbers
versus 
1,6-dichlorocyclohexenenot2,3-dichlorocyclohexenebecause 1 < 2ClCl5-ethyl-1-methylcyclohexenenot4-ethyl-2-methylcyclohexenebecause 1 < 2CH3CH2CH3235).(167CH3CH3CH2CH34,5-dimethylcyclohexene1233215445CH3CH2CH34-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexene3-ethylcyclopenteneCH3CHCHCCH
2CH32-bromo-4-methyl-3-hexenenot5-bromo-3-methyl-3-hexenebecause 2  3BrCH
3CH3CH2CH2CCHCH
2CHCH32,5-dimethyl-4-octenenot4,7-dimethyl-4-octenebecause 2  4CH3CH3CH3CH2CHCHCH2CHCH
21234567BrCl3,6-dimethyl-3-octene5-bromo-4-chloro-1-heptene
1357
2468
CH3CHCHCHCH
34-methyl-2-pentene345
21CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OCH2CH2CHCH
24-pentoxy-1-butene1234CH3CH3CCHCH
2CH2CH33-methyl-3-heptene4567
321CH2CH3Tutorial: 
Alkene nomenclatureBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 114
6.If both directions lead to the same number for the alkene functional group suffix
and the same low number(s) for one or more of the substituents,then those sub-

stituents are ignored and the direction is chosen that gives the lowest number to

one of the remaining substituents.The carbons of an alkene are called 
vinylic carbons. An carbon that is ad-
jacent to a vinylic carbon is called an 
allylic carbon.Two groups containing a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond are used in common names
Ñthe vinyl group
and the allyl group
. The vinyl group is the smallest possible group
that contains a vinylic carbon; the allyl group is the smallest possible group that con-

tains an allylic carbon. When 
ÒallylÓis used in nomenclature,the substituent must be
attached to the allylic carbon.PROBLEM 4Draw the structure for each of the following compounds:
a.3,3-dimethylcyclopentenec.ethyl vinyl ether
b.6-bromo-2,3-dimethyl-2-hexened.allyl alcohol
PROBLEM 5Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
CH3CHCHOCH
2CH2CH2CH3BrCH3CH3CH3CH2CCCHCH
3CH3CH3ClBrCH
2CH2CHCCH
3CH2CH3CH3CHCHCHCH
3CH3CHH2CCHCH2CHCH2Brthe vinyl groupCHClH2Cchloroethenevinyl chlorideH2C3-bromopropeneallyl bromidesystematic name:common name:H2Cthe allyl groupRCH2CH2RCHCHvinylic carbonsallylic carbonssp3sp2CH3CHCH2CHCCH
2CHCH32-bromo-4-ethyl-7-methyl-4-octenenot7-bromo-5-ethyl-2-methyl-4-octenebecause 4 < 5CH3CH2CH3Br6-bromo-3-chloro-4-methylcyclohexenenot3-bromo-6-chloro-5-methylcyclohexenebecause 4 < 5BrClCH3Section 3.2Nomenclature of Alkenes
115Tutorial: 
Common names of alkyl
groupsBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 115
116CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and Kinetics3.3The Structure of Alkenes
The structure of the smallest alkene (ethene) was described in Section1.8. Other
alkenes have similar structures. Each double-bonded carbon of an alkene has three 

orbitals that lie in a plane with angles of 120
¡. Each of these orbitals overlaps an
orbital of another atom to form a bond. Thus,one of the carbon
Ðcarbon bonds in a
double bond is a bond,formed by the overlap of an orbital of one carbon with an
orbital of the other carbon. The second carbon
Ðcarbon bond in the double bond
(the bond) is formed from side-to-side overlap of the remaining 
porbitals of the carbons. Because three points determine a plane,each carbon and the two atoms

singly bonded to it lie in a plane. In order to achieve maximum orbital
Ðorbital overlap,
the two 
porbitals must be parallel to each other. Therefore,all six atoms of the double-
bond system are in the same plane.It is important to remember that the bond represents the cloud of electrons that is
above and below the plane defined by the two carbons and the four atoms 

bonded to them.PROBLEM 6For each of the following compounds,tell how many of its carbon atoms lie in the same
plane:3.4CisÐTrans Isomerism
Because the two 
porbitals that form the bond must be parallel to achieve maximum
overlap,rotation about a double bond does not readily occur. If rotation were to

occur,the two 
porbitals would no longer overlap and the bond would break
(Figure3.1). The barrier to rotation about a double bond is Compare

this to the barrier to rotation about a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond(Section2.10).
(2.9 kcalmol)63 kcalmol.ppCH3a.d.CH3CH3c.CH3b.CH3p orbitals overlap to forma p bondH3CCH3H3CCH3CCsp2pthe six carbon atomsare in the same planeCH3CH3H3CH3CCCsp2sp2psp2sp2sssp2sp23-D Molecule: 2,3-Dimethyl-2-buteneBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 116
Section 3.4Cis
ÐTrans Isomerism
117Because there is an energy barrier to rotation about a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond,an alkene such as 2-butene can exist in two distinct forms:The hydrogens bonded to

the carbons can be on the same side of the double bond or on opposite sides of the

double bond. The isomer with the hydrogens on the same side of the double bond is

called the cisisomer
,and the isomer with the hydrogens on opposite sides of the dou-
ble bond is called the trans isomer. A pair of isomers such as 
cis-2-butene and
trans
-2-butene is called 
cisÐtransisomers
or geometric isomers. This should remind
you of the cisÐtrans isomers of 1,2-disubstituted cyclohexanes you encountered in
Section2.13
Ñthe cis isomer had its substituents on the same side of the ring,and the
trans isomer had its substituents on opposite sides of the ring. CisÐtrans isomers have
the same molecular formula,but differ in the way their atoms are arranged in space

(Section2.14).
If one of the carbons of the double bond is attached to two identical sub-
stituents,there is only one possible structure for the alkene. In other words,cis and

trans isomers are not possible for an alkene that has identical substituents attached to

one of the double-bonded carbons.Because of the energy barrier to rotation about a double bond,cis and trans isomers
cannot interconvert (except under conditions extreme enough to overcome the barrier

and break the bond). This means that they can be separated from each other. In other

words,the two isomers are different compounds with different physical properties,

such as different boiling points and different dipole moments. Notice that 
trans
-2-butene
pHHCH3CH3CH3CH2HCCcis and trans isomers are not possible for these compounds becausetwo substituents on an sp2 carbon are the sameCClCCH3sp2CH3H3CHHCCCH3HH3CHCCcis-2-butenetrans-2-butenesp23-D Molecules: cis-2-Butene; trans-2-Butenecis isomerHCH3Ctrans isomerpbond is brokenHCH3CCHH3CCHH3CCHH3CCHCH3CFigure 3.1
Rotation about the carbonÐcarbon double bond would break the bond.
p3-D Molecule: 2-Methyl-2-penteneBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 117
and trans
-1,2-dichloroethene have dipole moments of zero because the bond dipole
moments cancel (Section1.15).
Cis and trans isomers can be interconverted (in the absence of any added reagents)
only when the molecule absorbs sufficient heat or light energy to cause the bond to

break,because once the bond is broken,rotation can occur about the remaining bond

(Section2.10). Cis
Ðtrans interconversion,therefore,is not a practical laboratory process.
PROBLEM 7a.Which of the following compounds can exist as cis
Ðtrans isomers?b.For those compounds,draw and label the cis and trans isomers.
1.3.
2.4.
CH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3CHCHCH
3CH3CHCHCH
2CH3 > 180 ¼C orhcis-2-pentenetrans-2-penteneHCH2CH3CCH2CH3HCHCH3CHCH3Csppm118CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and Kinetics3-D Molecules: cis-Retinal; trans-RetinalCISÐTRANS INTERCONVERSION IN VISIONWhen rhodopsin absorbs light,a double bond interconverts between the cis and trans forms. This process plays an
important role in vision (Section26.7).
cis-2-butenebp  3.7 ¼Cm  0.33 DCH3HH3CHHHCCcis-1,2-dichloroethenebp  60.3 ¼Cm  2.95 DClClCCH3CHCtrans-2-butenebp  0.9 ¼Cm  0 DCH3HCtrans-1,2-dichloroethenebp   47.5 ¼Cm   0 DClHClHCCNopsin
Nopsin
OPSINOPSINrhodopsinmetarhodopsin II
(trans-rhodopsin)cis double bondlighttrans double bondBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 118
Section 3.5The 
E,ZSystem of Nomenclature119PROBLEM 8Which of the following compounds have a dipole moment of zero?
3.5The E,ZSystem of Nomenclature
As long as each of the carbons of an alkene is bonded to only one substituent,we
can use the terms cis and trans to designate the structure of the alkene. 
If the hydrogens
are on the same side of the double bond,it is thecis isomer; if they are on opposite

sides of the double bond,it is thetransisomer
. But how would you designate the iso-
mers of a compound such as 1-bromo-2-chloropropene?For a compound such as 1-bromo-2-chloropropene,the cis
Ðtrans system of nomen-
clature cannot be used because there are four different substituents on the two vinylic

carbons. The 
E,Zsystem of nomenclature was devised for these kinds of situations.*
To name an isomer by the 
E,Zsystem,we first determine the relative priorities of
the two groups bonded to one of the carbons and then the relative priorities of the

two groups bonded to the other carbon. (The rules for assigning relative priorities

are explained next.) If the high-priority groups are on the same side of the double

bond,the isomer has the 
Zconfiguration (
Zis for 
zusammen,German for 
ÒtogetherÓ).If the high-priority groups are on opposite sides of the double bond,the isomer has the

Econfiguration (
Eis for entgegen
,German for 
ÒoppositeÓ).The relative priorities of the two groups bonded to an carbon are determined
using the following rules:
¥Rule 1.The relative priorities of the two groups depend on the atomic numbers
of the atoms that are bonded directly to the carbon. The greater the atomic

number,the higher is the priority.
For example,in the following compounds,one of the carbons is bonded to
a Br and to an H:ClBrClBrthe Z isomerthe 
E isomerhigh priorityhigh priority
CH3CHCCH3CHCsp2sp2sp2the Z isomerlow priorityhigh prioritylow priorityhigh priority the E isomerCChigh prioritylow prioritylow priorityhigh priorityCCsp2sp2Which isomer is cis and which is trans?ClCH3CHCBrCH3ClCHCBrsp2ClClCHCHHHCClCHClHCClCHHClCClCHABCD
The Zisomer has the high-prioritygroups on the same side.
*IUPAC prefers the 
Eand Zdesignations because they can be used for all alkene isomers. Many
chemists,however,continue to use the cis and trans designations for simple molecules.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 119
120CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsThe greater the atomic number of the
atom bonded to an carbon, the high-

er is the priority of the substituent.sp2Br has a greater atomic number than H,so 
Brhas a higher priority than H. Theother carbon is bonded to a Cl and to a C. Cl has the greater atomic number,

so Clhas a higher priority than C. (Notice that you use the atomic number of C,not the mass of the group,because the priorities are based on the atomic

numbers of atoms,noton the masses of groups.) The isomer on the left has the
high-priority groups (Br and Cl) on the same side of the double bond,so it is the

Zisomer. (Zee groups are on Zee Zame Zide.) The isomer on the right has the
high-priority groups on opposite sides of the double bond,so it is the 
Eisomer.¥Rule 2.If the two substituents bonded to an carbon start with the same atom
(there is a tie),you must move outward from the point of attachment and consid-

er the atomic numbers of the atoms that are attached to the ÒtiedÓatoms.In the following compounds,one of the carbons is bonded both to a Cl
and to the C of a group:
Cl has a greater atomic number than C,so the Cl group has the higher priority.
Both atoms bonded to the other carbon are C
Õs (from a group and an
group),so there is a tie at this point. The C of the group is
bonded to O,H,and 
H,and the C of the group is bonded to 
C,C,and
H. Of these six atoms,O has the greatest atomic number,so has a high-
er priority than (Note that you do not add the atomic numbers; you

take the single atom with the greatest atomic number.) The 
Eand Zisomers areas shown.
¥Rule 3.If an atom is doubly bonded to another atom,the priority system treats
it as if it were singly bonded to two of those atoms. If an atom is triply bonded to

another atom,the priority system treats it as if it were singly bonded to three of

those atoms.For example,one of the carbons in the following pair of isomers is bond-
ed to a group and to a group:
Because the atoms immediately bonded to the carbon are both C
Õs,there is a
tie. The first carbon of the group is bonded to 
C,H,and 
H. The first
carbon of the group is bonded to an H and doubly bonded to a C.

Therefore,it is considered to be bonded to 
C,C,and 
H. One C cancels in each
of the two groups,leaving H and H in the group and C and H in the
group. C has a greater atomic number than H,so has a
higher priority than Both atoms that are bonded to the other car-

bon are CÕs,so there is a tie there as well. The triple-bonded C is considered to
be bonded to 
C,C,and 
C; the other C is bonded to 
O,H,and 
H. Of the six
atoms,O has the greatest atomic number,so has a higher priority than
¥Rule 4.In the case of isotopes (atoms with the same atomic number,but differ-
ent mass numbers),the mass number is used to determine the relative priorities.
CCH.CH2OHsp2CH2CH3.CHCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCH2CH2CH3sp2CHCH
2CH2CH3CCHCCCHCCHOCH2CH2CH3CCHCH
2HOCH2the Z isomerthe 
E isomerCHCH2CH2CH3sp2CH(CH3)2.CH2OHCH(CH3)2CH2OHCH(CH3)2CH2OHsp2ClCH3CHCH3CH2OHthe Z isomerthe 
E isomerCCClCH2ClCH3CHCH3CH2OHCCClCH2CH2Clsp2sp2CH3sp2If the atoms attached to carbons are
the same, the atoms attached to the
ÒtiedÓ atoms are compared; the one
with the greatest atomic number

belongs to the group with the higher

priority.
sp2If an atom is doubly bonded to anotheratom, treat it as if it were singly bonded

to two of those atoms.If an atom is triply bonded to anotheratom, treat it as if it were singly bonded

to three of those atoms.
Cancel atoms that are identical in the
two groups; use the remaining atoms to

determine the group with the higher

priority.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 120
Section 3.6How Alkenes React 
¥ Curved Arrows121If atoms have the same atomic number,
but different mass numbers, the one

with the greater mass number has the

higher priority.
In the following structures,for example,one of the carbons is bonded to a
deuterium (D) and a hydrogen (H):D and H have the same atomic number,but D has a greater mass number,so 
Dhas a higher priority than H. The C
Õs that are bonded to the other carbon are
bothbonded to C,C,and 
H,so you must go out to the next set of atoms to break
the tie. The second carbon of the group is bonded to 
H,H,and 
H,whereas the second carbon of the group is bonded to 
H,H,and 
C.Therefore,has a higher priority than 
Notice in all these examples that you never count the atom attached to the bond
from which you originate. In differentiating between the and 

groups in the last example,you do,however,count the atom attached to a bond from

which you originate. In the case of a triple bond,you count the atoms bonded to both
bonds from which you originate.PROBLEM 9Draw and label the 
Eand Zisomers for each of the following compounds:
1.3.
2.4.
PROBLEM 10Draw the structure of -3-isopropyl-2-heptene.
3.6How Alkenes React ¥ Curved Arrows
There are many millions of organic compounds. If you had to memorize how each of
them reacts,studying organic chemistry would be a horrendous experience. Fortunate-

ly,organic compounds can be divided into families,and all the members of a family

react in similar ways. What determines the family an organic compound belongs to is

its functional group. The 
functional group
is a structural unit that acts as the center ofreactivity of a molecule. You will find a table of common functional groups inside the

back cover of this book. You are already familiar with the functional group of an

alkene:the carbon
Ðcarbon double bond. All compounds with a carbon
Ðcarbon doublebond react in similar ways,whether the compound is a small molecule like ethene or a

large molecule like cholesterol.
()HOCH2CH2CCCCH
C(CH3)3CHOCH3CH2CCHCH
2CH3ClCH3CH2CCH3CH2CH2CH2CCH2ClCHCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCHCH
3ppCHCH2CH(CH3)2sCH(CH3)2.CHCH2CHCH2CH(CH3)2sp2CHCH3CCHCH3CCHCH3DCH
CH2CHCH3DCHCH2the Z isomerthe 
E isomersp2Tutorial: 
Eand ZNomenclatureBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 121
122CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsTo further reduce the need to memorize,one needs to understand 
whya functionalgroup reacts the way it does. It is not sufficient to know that a compound with a

carbonÐcarbon double bond reacts with HBr to form a product in which the H and Br
atoms have taken the place of the bond; we need to understand 
whythe compoundreacts with HBr. In each chapter that discusses the reactivity of a particular functional

group,we will see how the nature of the functional group allows us to predict the kind

of reactions it will undergo. Then,when you are confronted with a reaction you have

never seen before,knowledge of how the structure of the molecule affects its reactivi-

ty will help you predict the products of the reaction.In essence,organic chemistry is about the interaction between electron-rich atoms or
molecules and electron-deficient atoms or molecules. It is these forces of attraction that

make chemical reactions happen. From this follows a very important rule that determines

the reactivity of organic compounds:
Electron-rich atoms or molecules are attracted to
electron-deficient atoms or molecules.
Each time you study a new functional group,re-
member that the reactions it undergoes can be explained by this very simple rule.
Therefore,to understand how a functional group reacts,you must first learn to rec-
ognize electron-deficient and electron-rich atoms and molecules. An electron-deficient

atom or molecule is called an 
electrophile
. An electrophile can have an atom that can
accept a pair of electrons,or it can have an atom with an unpaired electron and,there-

fore,is in need of an electron to complete its octet. Thus,an electrophile looks for

electrons. Literally,
ÒelectrophileÓmeans Òelectron loving
Ó(phileis the Greek suffix
for Òloving
Ó).An electron-rich atom or molecule is called a 
nucleophile. A nucleophile has a pair
of electrons it can share. Some nucleophiles are neutral and some are negatively

charged. Because a nucleophile has electrons to share and an electrophile is seeking

electrons,it should not be surprising that they attract each other. Thus,the preceding

rule can be restated as a nucleophile reacts with an electrophile.
Because an electrophile accepts a pair of electrons,it is sometimes called a 
Lewis
acid. Because a nucleophile has a pair of electrons to share,it is sometimes called a
Lewis base
(Section1.21).
these are nucleophiles because theyhave a pair of electrons to shareCl  H2OHO  CH3NH2these are electrophiles because theycan accept a pair of electronsCH3CH2BH3Hthis is an electrophile becauseit is seeking an electronBrpHHHHethenecholesterolCCHOHOHBrHCCH
HBrHHHBrHBrElectron-rich atoms or molecules are
attracted to electron-deficient atoms or

molecules.A nucleophile reacts with an
electrophile.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 122
Section 3.6How Alkenes React 
¥ Curved Arrows123Curved arrows show the flow of elec-
trons; they are drawn from an electron-

rich center to an electron-deficient

center.
An arrowhead with two barbs signifies
the movement of two electrons.
We have seen that a bond is weaker than a bond (Section1.14). The bond,
therefore,is the bond that is most easily broken when an alkene undergoes a reaction.

We also have seen that the bond of an alkene consists of a cloud of electrons above

and below the bond. As a result of this cloud of electrons,an alkene is an electron-

rich moleculeÑit is a nucleophile. (Notice the relatively electron-rich orange area in
the electrostatic potential maps for cis-and 
trans
-2-butene in Section3.4.) We can,
therefore,predict that an alkene will react with an electrophile and,in the process,the
bond will break. So if a reagent such as hydrogen bromide is added to an alkene,the
alkene will react with the partially positively charged hydrogen of hydrogen bromide

and a carbocation will be formed. In the second step of the reaction,the positively

charged carbocation (an electrophile) will react with the negatively charged bromide

ion (a nucleophile) to form an alkyl halide.
The description of the step-by-step process by which reactants (e.g.,)
are changed into products (e.g.,alkyl halide) is called the 
mechanism of the reaction
.To help us understand a mechanism,curved arrows are drawn to show how the elec-

trons move as new covalent bonds are formed and existing covalent bonds are broken.

In other words,the curved arrows show which bonds are formed and which are broken.

Because the curved arrows show how the electrons flow,
they are drawn from an elec-
tron-rich center (
at the tail of the arrow) 
to an electron-deficient center
(at the point ofthe arrow). An arrowhead with two barbs represents the simultaneous movement

of two electrons (an electron pair). An arrowhead with one barb represents the

movement of one electron. These are called 
Òcurved
Óarrows to distinguish them from
the ÒstraightÓarrows used to link reactants with products in chemical reactions.
For the reaction of 2-butene with HBr,an arrow is drawn to show that the two elec-
trons of the bond of the alkene are attracted to the partially positively charged hy-

drogen of HBr. The hydrogen,however,is not free to accept this pair of electrons

because it is already bonded to a bromine,and hydrogen can be bonded to only one

atom at a time (Section1.4). Therefore,as the electrons of the alkene move toward

the hydrogen,the H
ÑBr bond breaks,with bromine keeping the bonding electrons.
Notice that the electrons are pulled away from one carbon,but remain attached to

the other. Thus,the two electrons that formerly formed the bond now form a bond

between carbon and the hydrogen from HBr. The product of this first step in the reac-

tion is a carbocation because the carbon that did not form the new bond with hy-

drogen no longer shares the pair of electrons. It is,therefore,positively charged.
In the second step of the reaction,a lone pair on the negatively charged bromide ion
forms a bond with the positively charged carbon of the carbocation. Notice that both

steps of the reaction involve 
the reaction of an electrophile with a nucleophile
.Solely from the knowledge that an electrophile reacts with a nucleophile and a 
bond is the weakest bond in an alkene,we have been able to predict that the product of

the reaction of 2-butene and HBr is 2-bromobutane. Overall,the reaction involves the
pCH3CHCHCH
3HBrCH3CHCHCH
3BrHpsp2sppppCH3CHCH
3CHCHCH
3CHCH3HBrBr
HddalkeneHBrpsppspAn arrowhead with one barb signifies
the movement of one electron.
CH3CHCHCH
3HBr
CH3CHCHCH3CH3CHCHCH3BrH
Ha carbocation2-bromobutanean alkyl halideBrddBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 123
124CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and Kineticsadditionof 1 mole of HBr to 1 mole of the alkene. The reaction,therefore,is called an
addition reaction
. Because the first step of the reaction involves the addition of an elec-
trophile to the alkene,the reaction is more precisely called an 
electrophilic addi-
tion reaction
. Electrophilic addition reactions are the characteristic reactions of alkenes.
At this point,you may think that it would be easier just to memorize the fact that
2-bromobutane is the product of the reaction,without trying to understand the mecha-

nism that explains why 2-bromobutane is the product. Keep in mind,however,that the

number of reactions you encounter is going to increase substantially,and it will be im-

possible to memorize them all. If you strive to understand the mechanism of each

reaction,the unifying principles of organic chemistry will become apparent,making

mastery of the material much easier and a lot more fun.PROBLEM 11Which of the following are electrophiles,and which are nucleophiles?
HAlCl3CH3OCH3CCH
3CHCH3NH3CH(H)It will be helpful to do the exercise on
drawing curved arrows in the Study

Guide/Solution Manual (Special
TopicIII).
A FEW WORDS ABOUT CURVED ARROWS
1.Make certain that the arrows are drawn in the direction of the electron flow and never against the flow. This means
that an arrow will always be drawn away from a negative charge and/or toward a positive charge.
2.Curved arrows are drawn to indicate the movement of electrons. Never use a curved arrow to indicate the movement of an atom.
For example,you can
Õt use an arrow as a lasso to remove the proton,as shown here:
3.The arrow starts at the electron source. It does not start at an atom. In the following example,the arrow starts at the elect
rons of
the bond,not at a carbon atom:
BrCHCH3CH3CHBrHCH3CHCHCH
3HBrCHCH3CH3CHBrHCH3CHCHCH
3HincorrectcorrectpOCH3CCH3HHOCH3CCH3OCH3CCH3CH3CCH3HHOincorrectcorrectCH3CCH3OBrCH3CCH3OBrCH3OHOHHCH3HcorrectcorrectCH3CCH3OBrCH3CCH3OBrCH3OHOHHCH3HincorrectincorrectBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 124
Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
125PROBLEM 12Use curved arrows to show the movement of electrons in each of the following reaction steps:
a.b.c.d.3.7Thermodynamics and KineticsBefore we can understand the energy changes that take place in a reaction such as the
addition of HBr to an alkene,we must have an understanding of 
thermodynamics,which describes a reaction at equilibrium,and an appreciation of 
kinetics,which deals
with the rates of chemical reactions.If we consider a reaction in which Y is converted to Z,the 
thermodynamicsof thereaction tells us the relative amounts of Y and Z that are present when the reaction has

reached equilibrium,whereas the 
kineticsof the reaction tells us how fast Y is convert-
ed into Z.Reaction Coordinate Diagrams
The mechanism of a reaction describes the various steps that are believed to occur as

reactants are converted into products. A 
reaction coordinate diagram
shows the
energy changes that take place in each of the steps of the mechanism. In a reaction

coordinate diagram,the total energy of all species is plotted against the progress of

the reaction. A reaction progresses from left to right as written in the chemical equa-

tion,so the energy of the reactants is plotted on the left-hand side of the 
x-axis andthe energy of the products is plotted on the right-hand side. A typical reaction coor-

dinate diagram is shown in Figure3.2. The diagram describes the reaction of A
ÑBwith C to form A and B
ÑC. Remember that 
the more stable the species,the lower is
its energy
.As the reactants are converted into products,the reaction passes through a
maximumenergy state called a 
transition state
. The structure of the transition state
lies somewhere between the structure of the reactants and the structure of the products.

Bonds that break and bonds that form,as reactants are converted to products,are

partially broken and partially formed in the transition state. Dashed lines are used to

show partially broken or partially formed bonds.
reactantsproducts
CABC
ABYZCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3ClCCCl
CH3HHHOCH3COHOH2OCH3COHOHBrBrOHHO
CH3COOH2OCH3COThe more stable the species,
the lower is its energy.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 125
126CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsThermodynamicsThe field of chemistry that describes the properties of a system at equilibrium is called
thermodynamics. The relative concentrations of reactants and products at equilibri-
um can be expressed numerically as an equilibrium constant,(Section1.17). For

example,in a reaction in which 
mmoles of A react with 
nmoles of B to form smolesof C and 
tmoles of D,is equal to the relative concentrations of products and reac-
tants at equilibrium.The relative concentrations of products and reactants at equilibrium depend on their
relative stabilities:
The more stable the compound,the greater is its concentration at
equilibrium. Thus,if the products are more stable (have a lower free energy) than the
reactants (Figure3.3a),there will be a higher concentration of products than reactants

at equilibrium,and will be greater than 1. On the other hand,if the reactants are

more stable than the products (Figure3.3b),there will be a higher concentration of re-

actants than products at equilibrium,and will be less than 1.
Several thermodynamic parameters are used to describe a reaction. The difference
between the free energy of the products and the free energy of the reactants under stan-

dard conditions is called the Gibbsfree-energy change
The symbol ¡indi-cates standard conditionsÑall species at a concentration of 1M,a temperature of
25C
¡,and a pressure of 1atm.
From this equation,we can see that will be negative if the products have a lower
free energy
Ñare more stableÑthan the reactants. In other words,the reaction will
G¡¡(free energy of the products)(free energy of the reactants) G¡.eqeqn B[products][reactants]s Ct Dm AKeq [C]s [D]t[A]m [B]neqeqThe more stable the compound, the
greater is its concentration at

equilibrium.Free energyProgress of the reactionProgress of the reactionreactantsreactantsproductsproductsbaG
Gan exergonic reactionG is negativeKeq  1an endergonic reactionG is positiveKeq  1Figure 3.3
Reaction coordinate diagrams for(a)a reaction in which the products

are more stable than the reactants
(an exergonic reaction) and (b)a

reaction in which the products are
less stable than the reactants (an
endergonic reaction).ABC
Free energyProgress of the reactionABCABfree energyof thereactantsfree energyof theproductstransition state:
the highest
energy state
on the reaction
pathwayCFigure 3.2
A reaction coordinate diagram. Thedashed lines in the transition state
indicate bonds that are partially
formed or partially broken.BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 126
release more energy than it will consume. It will be an 
exergonic reaction
(Figure3.3a). If the products have a higher free energy
Ñare less stableÑthan the re-actants,will be positive,and the reaction will consume more energy than it will

release; it will be an endergonic reaction
(Figure3.3b). (Notice that the terms
exergonic
and endergonic
refer to whether the reaction has a negative or a posi-
tive respectively. Do not confuse these terms with 
exothermic
and endothermic,which are defined later.)
Therefore,whether reactants or products are favored at equilibrium can be indicat-
ed either by the equilibrium constant or by the change in free energy 

These two quantities are related by the equation
where Ris the gas constant or 
because and Tis the temperature in degrees Kelvin
therefore,. (By solving Problem13,you will see
that even a small difference in gives rise to a large difference in the relative con-

centrations of products and reactants.)PROBLEM 13a.Which of the monosubstituted cyclohexanes in Table2.10has a negative for the
conversion of an axial-substituted chair conformer to an equatorial-substituted chair

conformer?b.Which monosubstituted cyclohexane has the most negative value of 
c.Which monosubstituted cyclohexane has the greatest preference for the equatorial position?

d.Calculate for conversion of 
ÒaxialÓmethylcyclohexane to 
ÒequatorialÓmethylcy-
clohexane at 25
¡C.PROBLEM 14SOLVED
a.The for conversion of 
ÒaxialÓfluorocyclohexane to 
ÒequatorialÓfluorocyclohex-
ane at 25¡C is (or Calculate the percentage of fluoro-
cyclohexane molecules that have the fluoro substituent in the equatorial position.
b.Do the same calculation for isopropylcyclohexane (whose at 25
¡C isor c.Why does isopropylcyclohexane have a greater percentage of the conformer with the
substituent in the equatorial position?SOLUTION TO 14aaxialequatorial
[fluorocyclohexane][fluorocyclohexane]fluorocyclohexaneNow we must determine the percentage of the total that is equatorial:fluorocyclohexane1.531equatorialaxial[fluorocyclohexane][fluorocyclohexane]equatorialequatorial[fluorocyclohexane]axialkcalmol KkcalmolG0.25 kcal/mol at 25 CG
1.531.531
1.532.53RT ln Keq.422.531.986298 K
.60or
60%1030.25ln Keqln KeqKeq8.8 kJmol).2.1 kcalmol,G¡1.05 kJmol).0.25 kcalmolG¡G¡G¡?G¡G¡25¡ C298 K)(K¡C273;4.184 kJ)1 kcalmol1 K1,8.314103 kJmol1 K1,(1.986103 kcalG¡RT ln eq G¡. eqG¡,G¡G¡Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
127Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839
Ð1903)was born in New Haven,Connecti-

cut,the son of a Yale professor. In

1863,he obtained the first Ph.D.

awarded by Yale in engineering. After

studying in France and Germany,he

returned to Yale to become a profes-

sor of mathematical physics. His
work on free energy received little at-

tention for more than 20 years be-

cause few chemists could understand

his mathematical treatment and be-

cause Gibbs published it in
Transactions of the Connecticut

Academy of Sciences,a relatively
obscure journal. In 1950,he was

elected to the Hall of Fame for Great

Americans.When products are favored at equilibri-
um, is negative and is greater

than 1.KeqG¡When reactants are favored at equilibri-
um, is positive and is less

than1.
KeqG¡BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 127
128CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsThe gas constant Ris thought to benamed after Henri Victor Regnault
(1810Ð1878),who was commissioned
by the French Minister of Public

Works in 1842 to redetermine all the

physical constants involved in the

design and operation of the steam

engine. Regnault was known for his

work on the thermal properties of

gases. Later,while studying the

thermodynamics of dilute solutions,
vanÕt Hoff (p. 194) found that 
Rcould be used for all chemical

equilibria.The Gibbs standard free-energy change has an enthalpy component
and an entropy component:
The enthalpyterm is the heat given off or the heat consumed during the
course of a reaction. Atoms are held together by bonds. Heat is given off when bonds

are formed,and heat is consumed when bonds are broken. Thus,is a measure of

the bond-making and bond-breaking processes that occur as reactants are converted

into products.If the bonds that are formed in a reaction are stronger than the bonds that are broken,
more energy will be released as a result of bond formation than will be consumed in

the bond-breaking process,and will be negative. A reaction with a negative 

is called an exothermic reaction
. If the bonds that are formed are weaker than those
that are broken,will be positive. A reaction with a positive is called an

endothermic reaction
.Entropy
is defined as the degree of disorder. It is a measure of the freedom
of motion of the system. Restricting the freedom of motion of a molecule decreases its

entropy. For example,in a reaction in which two molecules come together to form a

single molecule,the entropy in the product will be less than the entropy in the reac-

tants because two individual molecules can move in ways that are not possible when

the two are bound together in a single molecule. In such a reaction,will be nega-

tive. In a reaction in which a single molecule is cleaved into two separate molecules,

the products will have greater freedom of motion than the reactant,and will be

positive.
PROBLEM 15a.For which reaction will be more significant?
1.or

2.or
b.For which reaction will be positive?
A reaction with a negative has a favorable equilibrium constant;
that is,the reaction is favored as written from left to right because the products are

more stable than the reactants. If you examine the expression for the Gibbs standard

free-energy change,you will find that negative values of and positive values of
contribute to make negative. In other words,
the formation of products with
stronger bonds and with greater freedom of motion causesto be negative.
PROBLEM 16a.For a reaction with and calculate the
and the equilibrium constant (1)at 30¡C and (2)at 150¡C.b.How does change as 
Tincreases?c.How does change as 
Tincreases?Values of are relatively easy to calculate,so organic chemists frequently eval-
uate reactions only in terms of that quantity. However,you can ignore the entropy term

only if the reaction involves only a small change in entropy,because then the 

term will be small and the value of will be very close to the value of Ignor-
G¡.H¡TS¡H¡eqG¡G¡mol1,S¡0.01 kcalmol1H¡12 kcalG¡G¡S¡H¡ eq1G¡S¡ABCDABCABCABS¡¡(freedom of motion of the products)(freedom of motion of the reactants)S¡S¡ S¡H¡H¡H¡H¡¡(energy of the bonds being broken)(energy of the bonds being formed)H¡ H¡G¡H¡TS¡ S¡ H¡ G¡Entropy is the degree of disorder of a
system.The formation of products with stronger
bonds and with greater freedom of mo-

tion causes to be negative.
G¡BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 128
Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
129ing the entropy term can be a dangerous practice,however,because many organic
reactions occur with a significant change in entropy or occur at high temperatures and

so have significant terms. It is permissible to use values to 
approximate
whether a reaction occurs with a favorable equilibrium constant,but if a precise an-

swer is needed,values must be used. When values are used to construct re-

action coordinate diagrams,the 
y-axis is free energy; when values are used,the
y-axis is potential energy.
Values of can be calculated from bond dissociation energies (Table3.1). For
example,the for the addition of HBr to ethene is calculated as shown here:
bonds being brokenbonds being formedCCHHHHHBrHCCHCBrHBr
Hbond of etheneDH063 kcal/molHHHDH101 kcal/molBrCDH69 kcal/molDH087 kcal/molDHtotal150 kcal/molH for the reactionDH for bonds being brokenDH for bonds being formed150 kcal/mol170 kcal/mol
20 kcal/molDHtotal170 kcal/molH¡H¡H¡G¡G¡H¡TS¡Table 3.1Homolytic Bond Dissociation Energies
YZYZDH¡DH¡BondBond
105439104435
10142338159

10142358242
9941446192

9740636150
136571
88368103432

8535587366

8435171298

80334
108451
17472884350

23196682343
81338
11949779330

10443570294
9238769289
68285

63264

57239

55230
CH3CH2ICH3I(CH3)3CBr(CH3)2CHBrCH3CH2BrCH3OHCH3BrCH3OH(CH3)3CClHOH(CH3)2CHClCH3CH2ClHCCHCH3ClH2CCH2CH3F(CH3)3CCH3HI(CH3)2CHCH3HBrCH3CH2CH3HClCH3CH3HFII(CH3)3CHBrBr(CH3)2CHHClClCH3CH2CH2HFFCH3CH2HHHCH3HkJmolkcalmolkJmolkcalmolJ. Berkowitz,G.B. Ellison,D. Gutman,
J. Phys. Chem.
,1994,98,2744.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 129
130CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsThe bond dissociation energy is indicated by the special term Recall from
Section2.3that the barrier to rotation about the bond of ethene is In

other words,it takes to break the 
bond.The value of for 
Ñcalculated by subtracting the for the
bonds being formed from the for the bonds being broken
Ñindicates that the ad-dition of HBr to ethene is an exothermic reaction. But does this mean that the for

the reaction is also negative? In other words,is the reaction exergonic as well as

exothermic? Because has a significant negative value you can

assume that is also negative. If the value of were close to zero,you could no

longer assume that has the same sign as 
Keep in mind that two assumptions are being made when using values to pre-
dict values of The first is that the entropy change in the reaction is small,caus-

ing to be close to zero and,therefore,the value of to be very close to the

value of the second is that the reaction is taking place in the gas phase.
When reactions are carried out in solution,which is the case for the vast majority of
organic reactions,the solvent molecules can interact with the reagents and with the

products. Polar solvent molecules cluster around a charge (either a full charge or a par-

tial charge) on a reactant or product,so that the negative poles of the solvent molecules

surround the positive charge and the positive poles of the solvent molecules surround

the negative charge. The interaction between a solvent and a species (a molecule or

ion) in solution is called solvation
.Solvation can have a large effect on both the and the of a reaction. For ex-
ample,in a reaction in which a polar reagent is solvated,the for breaking the

dipoleÐdipole interactions between the solvent and the reagent has to be taken into ac-
count,and in a reaction in which a polar product is solvated,the for forming the

dipoleÐdipole interactions between the solvent and the product has to be taken into
account. In addition,solvation of a polar reagent or a polar product by a polar solvent

can greatly reduce the freedom of motion of the solvent molecules,and this will affect

the value of 
PROBLEM 17a.Using the bond dissociation energies in Table3.1,calculate the for the addition of
HCl to ethene.b.Calculate the for the addition of to ethene.
c.Are the reactions exothermic or endothermic?
d.Do you expect the reactions to be exergonic or endergonic?
KineticsKnowing whether a given reaction is exergonic or endergonic will not tell you how
fast the reaction occurs,because the of a reaction tells you only the difference be-

tween the stability of the reactants and the stability of the products; it does not tell youG¡H2H¡H¡S¡.H¡H¡S¡H¡ddddddddddddddddddddddddHHOHHOHHOHHOHHOHHOHOsolvation of a negative chargeby watersolvation of a positive chargeby waterHHOHG¡;H¡TS¡G¡.H¡G¡.H¡H¡G¡(20 kcalmol),H¡G¡H¡H¡H¡20 kcalmolp63 kcalmol63 kcalmol.pDH¡.3-D Molecule: Hydrated lithium cationBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 130
Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
131Free energyabcdFree energyProgress of the reactionGGGGProgress of the reactionGàGàGàGàFigure 3.4
Reaction coordinate diagrams for(a)a fast exergonic reaction, (b)a

slow exergonic reaction, (c)a fast

endergonic reaction, and (d)a slow

endergonic reaction. (The four
reaction coordinates are drawn on
the same scale.)anything about the energy barrier of the reaction,which is the energy 
ÒhillÓthat mustbe climbed for the reactants to be converted into products. The higher the energy bar-

rier,the slower is the reaction. 
Kineticsis the field of chemistry that studies the rates
of chemical reactions and the factors that affect those rates.
The energy barrier of a reaction,indicated in Figure3.4by is called the 
free
energy of activation
. It is the difference between the free energy of the transition state
and the free energy of the reactants:
The smaller the the faster is the reaction. Thus,
anything that destabilizes thereactant or stabilizes the transition state will make the reaction go faster.
Like has both an enthalpy component and an entropy component.
Notice that any quantity that refers to the transition state is represented by the double-

dagger superscript Some exergonic reactions have small free energies of activation and therefore can
take place at room temperature (Figure3.4a). In contrast,some exergonic reactions

have free energies of activation that are so large that the reaction cannot take place

without adding energy above that provided by the existing thermal conditions

(Figure3.4b). Endergonic reactions can also have either small free energies of activa-

tion,as in Figure3.4c,or large free energies of activation,as in Figure3.4d.
 à(entropy of the transition state)(entropy of the reactants) à(enthalpy of the transition state)(enthalpy of the reactants) GàHàTSà(à):GàG¡,Gà,à(free energy of the transition state)(free energy of the reactants)Gà,Notice that relates to the 
equilibrium constantof the reaction,whereas 
relates to the rate
of the reaction. The 
thermodynamic stabilityof a compound is in-dicated by If is negative,for example,the product is 
thermodynamicallystablecompared with the reactant,and if is positive,the product is
thermodynamically unstablecompared with the reactant. The 
kinetic stabilityof acompound is indicated by If for a reaction is large,the compound is

kinetically stablebecause it does not undergo that reaction rapidly. If is small,
the compound is kinetically unstableÑit undergoes the reaction rapidly. Generally,
when chemists use the term Òstability,
Óthey are referring to thermodynamic stability.
GàGàGà.G¡G¡G¡.GàG¡BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 131
132CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and Kineticsrate of a reactionnumber of collisionsper unit of timefraction withsufficient energyfraction withproper orientationPROBLEM 18a.Which of the reactions in Figure3.4has a thermodynamically stable product?
b.Which of the reactions in Figure3.4has the most kinetically stable product?

c.Which of the reactions in Figure3.4has the least kinetically stable product?
PROBLEM 19Draw a reaction coordinate diagram for a reaction in which
a.the product is thermodynamically unstable and kinetically unstable.
b.the product is thermodynamically unstable and kinetically stable.
The rate of a chemical reaction is the speed at which the reacting substances are
used up or the speed at which the products are formed. The rate of a reaction depends

on the following factors:
1.The number of collisions that take place between the reacting molecules in a
given period of time.
The greater the number of collisions,the faster is the
reaction.2.The fraction of the collisions that occur with sufficient energy to get the reacting
molecules over the energy barrier.
If the free energy of activation is small,more
collisions will lead to reaction than if the free energy of activation is large.
3.The fraction of the collisions that occur with the proper orientation.
For exam-
ple,2-butene and HBr will react only if the molecules collide with the hydrogen

of HBr approaching the bond of 2-butene. If collision occurs with the hydro-

gen approaching a methyl group of 2-butene,no reaction will take place,regard-

less of the energy of the collision.
Increasing the concentration of the reactants increases the rate of a reaction becauseit increases the number of collisions that occur in a given period of time. Increasing the

temperature at which the reaction is carried out also increases the rate of a reaction

because it increases both the frequency of collisions (molecules that are moving faster

collide more frequently) and the number of collisions that have sufficient energy to get

the reacting molecules over the energy barrier.
For a reaction in which a single reactant molecule A is converted into a product
molecule B,the rate of the reaction is proportional to the concentration of A. If the

concentration of A is doubled,the rate of the reaction will double; if the concentration

of A is tripled,the rate of the reaction will triple; and so on. Because the rate of this re-

action is proportional to the concentration of only onereactant,it is called a 
first-
order reaction
.We can replace the proportionality symbol with an equals sign if we use a pro-
portionality constant k,which is called a 
rate constant. The rate constant of a first-
order reaction is called a first-order rate constant
.A reaction whose rate depends on the concentrations of tworeactants is called asecond-order reaction
. If the concentration of either A or B is doubled,the rate of the
rate  k[A]()ABrate  [A]pBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 132
Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
133The smaller the rate constant,the slower is the reaction.
reaction will double; if the concentrations of both A and B are doubled,the rate of the
reaction will quadruple; and so on. In this case,the rate constant 
kis a second-orderrate constant.A reaction in which two molecules of A combine to form a molecule of B is also a
second-order reaction:If the concentration of A is doubled,the rate of the reaction will

quadruple.Do not confuse the 
rate constant
of a reaction with the 
rate
of a reaction. The
rate constant
tells us how easy it is to reach the transition state (how easy it is to get
over the energy barrier). Low energy barriers are associated with large rate constants

(Figures3.4aand 3.4c),whereas high energy barriers have small rate constants

(Figures3.4band 3.4d). The reaction 
rate
is a measure of the amount of product that
is formed per unit of time. The preceding equations show that the 
rate
is the product of
the rate constant and the concentration(s)
of the reactants. Thus,reaction rates de-
pend on concentration,whereas rate constants are independent of concentration.

Therefore,when we compare two reactions to see which one occurs more readily,we

must compare their rate constants and not their concentration-dependent rates of reac-

tion. (AppendixIIIexplains how rate constants are determined.)
Although rate constants are independent of concentration,they depend on tempera-
ture. The Arrhenius equationrelates the rate constant of a reaction to the experimen-
tal energy of activation and to the temperature at which the reaction is carried out. A

good rule of thumb is that an increase of 10
¡C in temperature will double the rate con-
stant for a reaction and,therefore,double the rate of the reaction.
The Arrhenius equation:where kis the rate constant,is the experimental energy of activation,
Ris the gas
constant or 
Tis the ab-solute temperature (K),and 
Ais the frequency factor. The frequency factor accounts
for the fraction of collisions that occur with the proper orientation for reaction. The

term corresponds to the fraction of the collisions that have the minimum ener-

gy needed to react. Taking the logarithm of both sides of the Arrhenius equation,

we obtainProblem 43 on page 140 shows how this equation is used to calculate kinetic
parameters.ln ln aRTaeaRTmol1 K1),8.314103 kJmol1 K1,(1.986103 kcalaeaRT()A  ABrate  k[A]2A  BC  Drate  k[A][B]Swedish chemist 
Svante August
Arrhenius (1859Ð1927)received a
Ph.D. from the University of Upp-

sala. Threatened with a low passing

grade on his dissertation because his

examiners did not understand his the-

sis on ionic dissociation,he sent the

work to several scientists,who subse-

quently defended it. His dissertation
earned Arrhenius the 1903 Nobel

Prize in chemistry. He was the first to

describe the Ògreenhouse
Óeffect,
predicting that as concentrations of

atmospheric carbon dioxide 
increase,so will Earth
Õs surface tem-perature (Section9.0).
(CO2)THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN AND Do not confuse the 
free energy of activation
,with the experimental energy of activation
,in
theArrhenius equation. The free energy of activation
has both an enthalpy component and
an entropy component,whereas the experimental energy of
GàHàTSàa,Gà,EaGàactivation has only an enthalpy component
since the entropy component is implicit in the A term in the Ar-

rhenius equation. Therefore,the experimental energy of activa-

tion is an approximate energy barrier to a reaction. The true

energy barrier to a reaction is given by because some re-

actions are driven by a change in enthalpy and some by a

change in entropy,but most by a change in both enthalpy and

entropy.
GàaHàRTBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 133
134CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsPROBLEM 20SOLVED
At 30
¡C,the second-order rate constant for the reaction of methyl chloride and is
a.What is the rate of the reaction when and 
b.If the concentration of methyl chloride is decreased to 0.01M,what effect will this have
on the rate
of the reaction?c.If the concentration of methyl chloride is decreased to 0.01M,what effect will this have
on the rate constant
of the reaction?SOLUTION TO 20aThe rate of the reaction is given by
Substituting the given rate constant and reactant concentrations yields
PROBLEM 21The rate constant for a reaction can be increased by _____ the stability of the reactant or by_____ the stability of the transition state.PROBLEM 22From the Arrhenius equation,predict how
a.increasing the experimental activation energy will affect the rate constant of a reaction.
b.increasing the temperature will affect the rate constant of a reaction.
How are the rate constants for a reaction related to the equilibrium constant? At
equilibrium,the rate of the forward reaction must be equal to the rate of the reverse

reaction because the amounts of reactants and products are not changing:Therefore,From this equation,we can see that the equilibrium constant for a reaction can be de-
termined from the relative concentrations of the products and reactants at equilibrium

or from the relative rate constants for the forward and reverse reactions. The reaction

shown in Figure3.3ahas a large equilibrium constant because the products are much

more stable than the reactants. We could also say that it has a large equilibrium con-

stant because the rate constant of the forward reaction is much greater than the rate

constant of the reverse reaction.
Keq k1          [B]k1        [A]
BAk1k1forward ratereverse rate
k1 [A] k1 [B]  1.0107 Ms1 rate
1.0105 M1s1 [0.10 M][0.10 M]ratek[methyl chloride] [HO]0.10 M?[HO]0.10 M[CH3Cl]1.0105 M1s1.HOBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 134
Section 3.7Thermodynamics and Kinetics
135Mechanistic Tutorial: 
Addition of HBr to an alkeneProgress of the reactionabFree energyFree energyProgress of the reactionGGàGàGreactantstransition statetransition stateproductcarbocationcarbocationFigure 3.5
Reaction coordinate diagrams forthe two steps in the addition of HBr
to 2-butene: (a)the first step;

(b)the second step.
PROBLEM 23a.Which reaction has the greater equilibrium constant,one with a rate constant of
for the forward reaction and a rate constant of for the reverse reac-
tion or one with a rate constant of for the forward reaction and a rate constant

of for the reverse reaction?
b.If both reactions start with a reactant concentration of 1M,which reaction will form the
most product?Reaction Coordinate Diagram for the Addition 
of HBr to 2-ButeneWe have seen that the addition of HBr to 2-butene is a two-step reaction (Section3.6).
The structure of the transition state for each of the steps is shown below in brackets.

Notice that the bonds that break and the bonds that form during the course of the reac-

tion are partially broken and partially formed in the transition state
Ñindicated bydashed lines. Similarly,atoms that either become charged or lose their charge during

the course of the reaction are partially charged in the transition state. Transition states

are shown in brackets with a double-dagger superscript.
A reaction coordinate diagram can be drawn for each of the steps in the reaction
(Figure3.5). In the first step of the reaction,the alkene is converted into a carbocation

that is less stable than the reactants. The first step,therefore,is endergonic is

positive). In the second step of the reaction,the carbocation reacts with a nucleophile

to form a product that is more stable than the carbocation reactant. This step,therefore,

is exergonic is negative).
(G¡(G¡CH3CHCH
3CHCHCH
3àCH3CHCH2CH3HBrtransition stateCHCH3HBrBràtransition stateBrBrBrCH3CHCH
2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH31103110211051103Because the product of the first step is the reactant in the second step,we can hook
the two reaction coordinate diagrams together to obtain the reaction coordinate
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 135
136CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsFree energyCH2CH3BrCH3CHCH3CHCH2CH3Progress of the reactionGintermediateBrCH3CHCHCH
3HBrFigure 3.6
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe addition of HBr to 2-butene.diagram for the overall reaction (Figure3.6). The for the overall reaction is the
difference between the free energy of the final products and the free energy of the ini-

tial reactants. The figure shows that for the overall reaction is negative. There-

fore,the overall reaction is exergonic.
G¡G¡Transition states have partially
formed bonds. Intermediates
have fully formed bonds.A chemical species that is the product of one step of a reaction and is the reactant
for the next step is called an 
intermediate. The carbocation intermediate in this reac-
tion is too unstable to be isolated,but some reactions have more stable intermediates

that can be isolated. Transition states
,in contrast,represent the highest-energy struc-
tures that are involved in the reaction. They exist only fleetingly and can never be iso-

lated. Do not confuse transition states with intermediates:
Transition states have
partially formed bonds,whereas intermediates have fully formed bonds.
We can see from the reaction coordinate diagram that the free energy of activation
for the first step of the reaction is greater than the free energy of activation for the sec-

ond step. In other words,the rate constant for the first step is smaller than the rate con-

stant for the second step. This is what you would expect because the molecules in the

first step of this reaction must collide with sufficient energy to break covalent bonds,

whereas no bonds are broken in the second step.
The reaction step that has its transition state at the highest point on the reaction co-
ordinate
is called the rate-determining stepor rate-limiting step. The rate-
determining step controls the overall rate of the reaction because the overall rate

cannot exceed the rate of the rate-determining step. In Figure3.6,the rate-determining

step is the first step
Ñthe addition of the electrophile (the proton) to the alkene.
Reaction coordinate diagrams also can be used to explain why a given reaction
forms a particular product,but not others. We will see the first example of this in

Section4.3.
PROBLEM 24Draw a reaction coordinate diagram for a two-step reaction in which the first step is ender-
gonic,the second step is exergonic,and the overall reaction is endergonic. Label the reac-

tants,products,intermediates,and transition states.
BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 136
Summary137SummaryAlkenes
are hydrocarbons that contain a double bond. The
double bond is the 
functional group
or center of reactivity
of the alkene. The 
functional group suffix
of an alkene is
Òene.ÓThe general molecular formula for a hydrocarbon is
minus two hydrogens for every bond or ring in
the molecule. The number of bonds and rings is called

the degree of unsaturation
. Because alkenes contain fewer
than the maximum number of hydrogens,they are called

unsaturated hydrocarbons
.Because of restricted rotation about the double bond,an
alkene can exist as 
cisÐtrans isomers. The cis isomerhasits hydrogens on the same side of the double bond; the

trans isomerhas its hydrogens on opposite sides of the
double bond. The 
Zisomerhas the high-priority groups on
the same side of the double bond; the 
Eisomerhas thehigh-priority groups on opposite sides of the double bond.
ppCH22,The relative priorities depend on the atomic numbers of the
atoms bonded directly to the carbons.
All compounds with a particular 
functional group
reactsimilarly. Due to the cloud of electrons above and below its
bond,an alkene is an electron-rich molecule,or
nucleophile. Nucleophiles are attracted to electron-
deficient atoms or molecules,called 
electrophiles
. Alkenes
undergo 
electrophilic addition reactions
. The description
of the step-by-step process by which reactants are changed

into products is called the mechanism of the reaction
.Curved arrows
show which bonds are formed and which
are broken and the direction of the electron flow that ac-

company these changes.
Thermodynamicsdescribes a reaction at equilibrium;kineticsdescribes how fast the reaction occurs. A 
reaction
coordinate diagramshows the energy changes that take
psp2PROBLEM 25a.Which step in the following reaction has the greatest free energy of activation?
b.Is the first-formed intermediate more apt to revert to reactants or go on to form products?
c.Which step in the reaction sequence is rate determining?
PROBLEM 26Draw a reaction coordinate diagram for the following reaction in which C is the most sta-
ble and B the least stable of the three species and the transition state going from A to B is

more stable than the transition state going from B to C:a.How many intermediates are there?
b.How many transition states are there?

c.Which step has the greater rate constant in the forward direction?

d.Which step has the greater rate constant in the reverse direction?

e.Of the four steps,which is the fastest?

f.Which is the rate-determining step in the forward direction?

g.Which is the rate-determining step in the reverse direction?
A 11 B 22 CBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 137
138CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and Kineticsplace in a reaction. The more stable the species,the lower is
its energy. As reactants are converted into products,a reac-

tion passes through a maximum energy 
transition state
. Anintermediateis the product of one step of a reaction and
the reactant for the next step. Transition states have partial-

ly formed bonds; intermediates have fully formed bonds.

The rate-determining stephas its transition state at the
highest point on the reaction coordinate.The relative concentrations of reactants and products at
equilibrium are given by the equilibrium constant The

more stable the compound,the greater is its concentration

at equilibrium. If products are more stable than reactants,
is is negative,and the reaction is 
exergonic
;if reactants are more stable than products,is positive,and the reaction is 
endergonic
. is the Gibbs free-energy change. 
is the change in enthalpyÑthe heat given off or consumed
as a result of bond making and bond breaking. An

exothermic reaction
has a negative an 
endothermicreaction
has a positive is the change in
S¡H¡.H¡;H¡G¡H¡TS¡;G¡G¡eq1,G¡1,eqeq.entropy
Ñthe change in the degree of disorder of the sys-
tem. A reaction with a negative has a 
favorable equi-
librium constant
:The formation of products with stronger
bonds and greater freedom of motion causes to be

negative. and are related by the formula 
The interaction between a solvent and a
species in solution is called solvation
.The free energy of activation
,is the energy barri-
er of a reaction. It is the difference between the free energy

of the reactants and the free energy of the transition state.

The smaller the the faster is the reaction. Anything

that destabilizes the reactant or stabilizes the transition state
makes the reaction go faster. 
Kinetic stabilityis given by
thermodynamic stabilityby The 
rateof a re-
action depends on the concentration of the reactants,the

temperature,and the rate constant. The 
rate constant,which is independent of concentration,indicates how easy

it is to reach the transition state. A 
first-order reaction
de-pends on the concentration of one reactant,a 
second-orderreaction
on the concentration of two reactants.
G¡.Gà,Gà,Gà,RT ln eq.G¡eqG¡G¡G¡Key Terms
acyclic (p. 112)
addition reaction (p. 124)
alkene (p. 111)

allyl group (p. 115)
allylic carbon (p. 115)
Arrhenius equation (p. 133)
cis isomer (p. 117)
cisÐtrans isomers (p. 117)degree of unsaturation (p. 112)

Eisomer (p. 120)electrophile (p. 122)
electrophilic addition reaction (p. 124)
endergonic reaction (p. 127)

endothermic reaction (p. 128)
enthalpy (p. 128)

entropy (p. 128)
exergonic reaction (p. 127)
exothermic reaction (p. 128)

experimental energy of activation (p.133)

first-order rate constant (p. 132)

first-order reaction (p. 132)

free energy of activation (p. 131)

functional group (p. 121)
geometric isomers (p. 117)
Gibbs free-energy change (p. 126)

intermediate (p. 136)
kinetics (p. 131)
kinetic stability (p. 131)
mechanism of the reaction (p. 123)
nucleophile (p. 122)
rate constant (p. 132)
rate-determining step (p. 136)rate-limiting step (p. 136)reaction coordinate diagram (p. 125)
saturated hydrocarbon (p. 112)
second-order rate constant (p. 133)
second-order reaction (p. 132)
solvation (p. 130)

thermodynamics (p. 126)
thermodynamic stability (p. 131)
trans isomer (p. 117)
transition state (p. 125)
unsaturated hydrocarbon (p. 112)
vinyl group (p. 115)

vinylic carbon (p. 115)

Zisomer (p. 120)Problems
27.Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.c.
b.d.
CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CCH3CCH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CHCH3CCH3CH2CH3CCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCHCHCH
2CH2CHCH3BrBrBRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 138
Problems13928.Give the structure of a hydrocarbon that has six carbon atoms and
a.three vinylic hydrogens and two allylic hydrogens.c.three vinylic hydrogens and no allylic hydrogens.

b.three vinylic hydrogens and one allylic hydrogen.
29.Draw the structure for each of the following:
a.-1,3,5-tribromo-2-pentenec.-1,2-dibromo-3-isopropyl-2-hexenee.1,2-dimethylcyclopentene

b.-3-methyl-2-heptened.vinyl bromidef.diallylamine
30.a.Give the structures and the systematic names for all alkenes with molecular formula ignoring cis
Ðtrans isomers. (Hint:There are 13.)b.Which of the compounds have 
Eand Zisomers?31.Name the following compounds:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
32.Draw curved arrows to show the flow of electrons responsible for the conversion of the reactants into the products:
33.In a reaction in which reactant A is in equilibrium with product B at 25
¡C,what are the relative amounts of A and B present at
equilibrium if at 25
¡C isa.b.c.d.
34.Several studies have shown that a precursor of vitamin A,may play a role in preventing cancer. has a
molecular formula of and contains two rings and no triple bonds. How many double bonds does it have?
35.Tell whether each of the following compounds has the 
Eor the Zconfiguration:
a.c.
b.d.
36.Squalene,a hydrocarbon with molecular formula is obtained from shark liver. (
Squalusis Latin for Òshark.Ó) If squalene isan acyclic compound,how many bonds does it have?
37.Assign relative priorities to each set of substituents:
a.d.

b.e.

c.38.Molly Kule was a lab technician who was asked by her supervisor to add names to the labels on a collection of alkenes that s
howed
only structures on the labels. How many did Molly get right? Correct the incorrect names.

a.3-pentenee.5-ethylcyclohexenei.2-methylcyclopentene

b.2-octenef.5-chloro-3-hexenej.2-ethyl-2-butene

c.2-vinylpentaneg.5-bromo-2-pentene

d.1-ethyl-1-penteneh.-2-methyl-1-hexene
()CH2CH2CH3, CH(CH3)2, CHCH2, CH3COCH3, CHCH2, Cl, CNCH2CH2OH, OH, CH2Cl, CHCH2CH2NH2, NH2, OH, 
CH2OHBr, I, OH, CH3pC30H50,OCH3CCH2BrCH2CH2ClCHOCH2CHCC
CH2CHCH
2CH(CH3)2CCH3CCH2BrCH2CH2CH2CH3CBrCH3CCH2CH3CH2CH2ClCCH3CH2CH3CC40H56b-Caroteneb-carotene,0.65 kcalmol?2.72 kcalmol?0.65 kcalmol?2.72 kcalmol?G¡CCHHHBr
HHBrH2OHOHHCHCHBrC6H12,()()()BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 139
140CHAPTER 3A
lkenes¥ Thermodynamics and KineticsCALCULATING KINETIC
PARAMETERS
In order to calculate and for a reac-
tion,rate constants for the reaction must be obtained at several

temperatures:¥can be obtained from the Arrhenius equation from (the
slope of a plot of ln kversus because
¥At a given temperature,can be determined from 
because HàaRT.aHàln 2ln 1a12111,aSàHà,a,¥in can be determined from the following
equation,which relates to the rate constant at a

given temperature:
In this equation,his PlanckÕs constantand is Boltzmann
Õs constant¥The entropy of activation can be determined from the
other two kinetic parameters via the formula 
Use this information to answer Problem43.
HàGà.Sà(1.380661023 JK1).B(6.626081034 Js)GàRT ln BGàkJmol,Gà,39.Given the following reaction coordinate diagram for the reaction of A to give D,answer the following questions:
a.How many intermediates are there in the reaction?e.What is the reactant of the rate-determining step?
b.How many transition states are there?f.Is the first step of the reaction exergonic or endergonic?

c.What is the fastest step in the reaction?g.Is the overall reaction exergonic or endergonic?

d.Which is more stable,A or D?
40.a.What is the equilibrium constant of a reaction that is carried out at 25
¡C (298K) with and 
b.What is the equilibrium constant of the same reaction carried out at 125
¡C?41.a.For a reaction that is carried out at 25
¡C,how much must change in order to increase the equilibrium constant by a factor
of 10?b.How much must change if c.How much must change if 
42.Given that the twist-boat conformer of cyclohexane is (or ) higher in free energy than the chair
conformer,calculate the percentage of twist-boat conformers present in a sample of cyclohexane at 25
¡C. Does your answer agreewith the statement made in Section2.12about the relative number of molecules in these two conformations?
15.9 kJmol3.8 kcalmoleH¡0 kcal mol1?S¡S¡0 cal K1 mol1?H¡G¡K1 mol1?S¡25 calH¡20 kcalmolABCDProgress of the reactionFree energyTemperatureObserved rate constant
31.0¡C40.0¡C51.5¡C59.8¡C69.2¡C4.34
104 s12.10104 s11.16104 s14.44105 s12.11105 s143.Rate constants for a reaction were determined at five temperatures. From the following data,calculate the experimental energ
y ofactivation and then calculate and for the reaction at 30
¡C:SàHà,Gà,BRUI03-109_140r4  24-03-2003  11:53 AM  Page 140
A cyclic bromonium ion
We haveseen that an alkene such as 2-butene undergoes an
electrophilic addition reaction
with HBr (Section3.6).
The first step of the reaction is a relatively slow addition of
the electrophilic proton to the nucleophilic alkene to form a carbocation

intermediate. In the second step,the positively charged carbocation inter-

mediate (an electrophile) reacts rapidly with the negatively charged bromide

ion (a nucleophile).In this chapter,we will look at a wide variety of alkene reactions. You will see that
some of the reactions form carbocation intermediates like the one formed when HBr

reacts with an alkene,some form other kinds of intermediates,and some donÕt form an

intermediate at all. At first,the reactions covered in this chapter might appear to be

quite different,but you will see that they all occur by similar mechanisms. So as you

study each reaction,notice the feature that all alkene reactions have in common:
Therelatively loosely held electrons of the carbonÐcarbon double bond are attracted to

an electrophile. Thus,each reaction starts with the addition of an electrophile to one

of the carbons of the alkene and concludes with the addition of a nucleophile to the

other carbon. The end result is that the bond breaks and the carbons form
new bonds with the electrophile and the nucleophile.
CCC
YZCY+Zthe double bond is composedof a  bond and a  bondelectrophilenucleophile
the  bond has broken andnew  bonds have formedssp2psp2sp2pCCHslowHa carbocationintermediateCCfastBrBr
BrHCC4Reactions of Alkenes141BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 141
142CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesThis reactivity makes alkenes an important class of organic compounds because
they can be used to synthesize a wide variety of other compounds. For example,alkyl

halides,alcohols,ethers,and alkanes all can be synthesized from alkenes by elec-

trophilic addition reactions. The particular product obtained depends only on the

electrophile
and the nucleophileused in the addition reaction.4.1Addition of Hydrogen Halides
If the electrophilic reagent that adds to an alkene is a hydrogen halide (HF,HCl,HBr,
or HI),the product of the reaction will be an alkyl halide:
Because the alkenes in the preceding reactions have the same substituents on both
of the carbons,it is easy to determine the product of the reaction:The electrophile
adds to one of the carbons,and the nucleophile adds to the other 
carbon. It doesn
Õt make any difference which carbon the electrophile attaches to,
because the same product will be obtained in either case.But what happens if the alkene does not have the same substituents on both of the
carbons? Which carbon gets the hydrogen? For example,does the addition of
HCl to 2-methylpropene produce tert-butyl chloride or isobutyl chloride?
To answer this question,we need to look at the 
mechanism of the reaction
. Re-call that the first step of the reaction
Ñthe addition of to an carbon to form
either the tert-butyl cation or the isobutyl cation
Ñis the rate-determining step(Section3.7). If there is any difference in the rate of formation of these two carbo-

cations,the one that is formed faster will be the preferred product of the first step.

Moreover,because carbocation formation is rate determining,the particular carbo-

cation that is formed in the first step determines the final product of the reaction.

That is,if the 
tert-butyl cation is formed,it will react rapidly with to form 
tert-butyl chloride. On the other hand,if the isobutyl cation is formed,it will react rapid-

ly with to form isobutyl chloride. It turns out that the only product of the

reaction is tert-butyl chloride,so we know that the 
tert-butyl cation is formed faster
than the isobutyl cation.
ClClsp2HCH3CCH
2CH3CH3CCH3CH3Cltert-butyl chloride2-methylpropeneisobutyl chlorideCH3CHCH2ClCH3HClor
sp2sp2sp2sp2(X)sp2(H)sp2CCHBrCH
3CHCCH
3BrCH3CH3CH3CH3ICH2H3CH3CCH2CH3CH2ClHClHIetheneethyl chloride
2-bromo-2,3-dimethylbutane2,3-dimethyl-2-butenecyclohexeneiodocyclohexane
Synthetic Tutorial:
Addition of HBr to an alkene.BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 142
Section 4.2Carbocation Stability
143The greater the number of alkyl
substituents bonded to the positively
charged carbon, the more stable the

carbocation is.The question now is,Why is the 
tert-butyl cation formed faster than the isobutyl
cation? To answer this,we need to take a look at the factors that affect the stability of

carbocations and,therefore,the ease with which they are formed.
4.2Carbocation StabilityCarbocations are classified according to the number of alkyl substituents that are
bonded to the positively charged carbon:A 
primary carbocationhas one such sub-
stituent,a 
secondary carbocationhas two,and a 
tertiary carbocationhas three. The
stability of a carbocation increases as the number of alkyl substituents bonded to the

positively charged carbon increases. Thus,tertiary carbocations are more stable than

secondary carbocations,and secondary carbocations are more stable than primary car-

bocations. Notice that when we talk about the stabilities of carbocations,we mean

their relative
stabilities:Carbocations are not stable species; even the relatively stable
tertiary carbocation is not stable enough to isolate.Why does the stability of a carbocation increase as the number of alkyl substituents
bonded to the positively charged carbon increases? Alkyl groups decrease the concen-

tration of positive charge on the carbon
Ñand decreasing the concentration of positive
charge increases the stability of the carbocation. Notice that the blue
Ñrecall that bluerepresents electron-deficient atoms
Ñis most intense for the least stable methyl cationand is least intense for the most stable tert-butyl cation.
CH3CCH
2CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3ClClCltert-butyl chlorideonly product formedtert-butyl cationisobutyl chloridenot formedisobutyl cationCH3CHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2ClCH3HClelectrostaticpotential mapfor the tert-butyl cationelectrostaticpotential mapfor the isopropyl cationelectrostaticpotential mapfor the ethyl cationelectrostaticpotential mapfor the methyl cationR
Ra tertiarycarbocationRCRHa secondarycarbocationRCRHHa primarycarbocationCHHHmethyl cationCrelative stabilities of carbocations
least stablemost stableCarbocation stability: 3¡2¡1¡George Olah
was born in Hungaryin 1927 and received a doctorate

from the Technical University of

Budapest in 1949. The Hungarian

revolution caused him to emigrate to

Canada in 1956,where he worked as

a scientist at the Dow Chemical
Company until he joined the faculty
at Case Western Reserve University

in 1965. In 1977,he became a profes-

sor of chemistry at the University of

Southern California. In 1994,he re-

ceived the Nobel Prize for his work
on carbocations.BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 143
144CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesCHHHhyperconjugationCHHCHHHCH3CH2+ethyl cation+CH3methyl cationFigure 4.1
Stabilization of a carbocation byhyperconjugation: The electrons of
an adjacent CH bond in the ethyl

cation spread into the empty porbital. Hyperconjugation cannot
occur in a methyl cation.How do alkyl groups decrease the concentration of positive charge on the carbon?
Recall that the positive charge on a carbon signifies an empty 
porbital (Section1.10).
Figure4.1shows that in the ethyl cation,the orbital of an adjacent CH bond can

overlap with the empty 
porbital. No such overlap is possible in the methyl cation.
Movement of electrons from the bond orbital toward the vacant 
porbital of the ethylcation decreases the charge on the carbon and causes a partial positive charge to

develop on the carbon bonded by the bond. Therefore,the positive charge is no

longer localized solely on one atom,but is spread out over a greater volume of space.

This dispersion of the positive charge stabilizes the carbocation because a charged

species is more stable if its charge is spread out (delocalized) over more than one atom

(Section1.19). Delocalization of electrons by the overlap of a bond orbital with an

empty porbital is called hyperconjugation
. The simple molecular orbital diagram in
Figure4.2is another way to explain the stabilization achieved by the overlap of a filled

CH bond orbital with an empty 
porbital.ssssp2ssempty porbitalfilled bondCHEnergyFigure 4.2
A molecular orbital diagramshowing the stabilization achieved
by overlapping the electrons of a
filled CH bond with an empty 
porbital.Hyperconjugation occurs only if the bond orbital and the empty 
porbital have
the proper orientation. The proper orientation is easily achieved because there is

free rotation about a carbon
Ðcarbon bond (Section2.10). In the case of the 
tert-butyl cation,nine CH bond orbitals can potentially overlap with the empty 
porbital of the positively charged carbon. The isopropyl cation has six such orbitals,

and the ethyl cation has three. Therefore,there is greater stabilization through hy-

perconjugation in the tertiary tert-butyl cation than in the secondary isopropyl
cation and greater stabilization in the secondary isopropyl cation than in the prima-

ry ethyl cation.CH3CH3CH3tert-butyl cationCCH3HCH3isopropyl cationCCH3H
Hethyl cationCleast stablemost stablesssBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 144
Section 4.3The Structure of the Transition State
145George Simms Hammond
was bornin Maine in 1921. He received a B.S.

from Bates College in 1943 and a

Ph.D. from Harvard University in

1947. He was a professor of

chemistry at Iowa State University

and at the California Institute of
Technology and was a scientist at

Allied Chemical Co.Free energyProgress of the reactionIIIIIIan endergonicreactionan exergonic
reactionFigure 4.3
Reaction coordinate diagrams forreactions with (I)an early transition

state, (II)a midway transition state,

and (III)a late transition state.
PROBLEM 1List the carbocations in order of decreasing stability.
a.b.PROBLEM 2a.How many CH bond orbitals are available for overlap with the vacant 
porbital in themethyl cation?b.Which is more stable,a methyl cation or an ethyl cation?
4.3The Structure of the Transition State
Knowing something about the structure of a transition state is important when you
are trying to predict the products of a reaction. In Section3.7,you saw that the struc-

ture of the transition state lies between the structure of the reactants and the struc-
ture of the products. But what do we mean by 
ÒbetweenÓ? Does the structure of thetransition state lie 
exactly
halfway between the structures of the reactants and prod-
ucts (as in II in the following diagram),or does it resemble the reactants more close-

ly than it resembles the products (as in I),or is it more like the products than the

reactants (as in III)?According to the 
Hammond postulate,the transition state is more similar in struc-
ture to the species to which it is more similar in energy.
In the case of an exergonic re-
action,the transition state (I) is more similar in energy to the reactant than to the

product (Figure4.3,curve I). Therefore,the structure of the transition state will more
reactantsproducts
transition stateC (II)
(III)AB  (I) ABCABABC
CCABsymbolizes the transition stateààCH3CHCH2CH2FCH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2CH2 CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 145
146CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenesclosely resemble the structure of the reactant than that of the product. In an endergonic
reaction (Figure4.3,curve III),the transition state (III) is more similar in energy to the

product,so the structure of the transition state will more closely resemble the structure

of the product. Only when the reactant and the product have identical energies

(Figure4.3,curve II) would we expect the structure of the transition state (II) to be ex-

actly halfway between the structures of the reactant and the product.
Now we can understand why the 
tert-butyl cation is formed faster than the isobutyl
cation when 2-methylpropene reacts with HCl. Because the formation of a carbocation
is an endergonic reaction (Figure4.4),the structure of the transition state will resem-

ble the structure of the carbocation product. This means that the transition state will

have a significant amount of positive charge on a carbon. We know that the 
tert-butyl
cation (a tertiary carbocation) is more stable than the isobutyl cation (a primary carbo-

cation). The same factors that stabilize the positively charged carbocation product sta-

bilize the partially positively charged transition state. Therefore,the transition state

leading to the tert-butyl cation is more stable than the transition state leading to the
isobutyl cation. Because the amount of positive charge in the transition state is not as

great as the amount of positive charge in the carbocation product,the difference in the

stabilities of the two transition states is not as great as the difference in the stabilities

of the two carbocation products (Figure4.4).
CH3CH2CH3CHCH3CH3CGàGàCH3the difference in 
the stabilities of the 
transition statesthe difference in 

the stabilities of the 
carbocationsFree energyProgress of the reactiontert-butyl cationisobutyl cationFigure 4.4
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe addition of to

2-methylpropene to form the
primary isobutyl cation and the
tertiary tert-butyl cation.HWe have seen that the rate of a reaction is determined by the free energy of activa-
tion,which is the difference between the free energy of the transition state and the free

energy of the reactant (Section3.7). The more stable the transition state,the smaller is

the free energy of activation,and therefore,the faster is the reaction. Because the free

energy of activation for the formation of the 
tert-butyl cation is less than that for the
formation of the isobutyl cation,the 
tert-butyl cation will be formed faster. Thus,in an
electrophilic addition reaction,the more stable carbocation will be the one that is

formed more rapidly.
Because the formation of the carbocation is the rate-limiting step of the reaction,the relative rates of formation of the two carbocations determine the relative amounts

of the products that are formed. If the difference in the rates is small,both products

will be formed,but the major product will be the one formed from reaction of the nu-

cleophile with the more stable carbocation. If the difference in the rates is sufficiently

large,the product formed from reaction of the nucleophile with the more stable carbo-

cation will be the only product of the reaction. For example,when HCl adds to

2-methylpropene,the rates of formation of the two possible carbocation intermedi-

atesÑone primary and the other tertiaryÑare sufficiently different to cause 
tert-butyl
chloride to be the only product of the reaction.only product formed2-methylpropenenot formedCH3CH3ClCH3CH3CCH
2CH3CCH3CH3CHCH2ClHClBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 146
Section 4.4Regioselectivity of Electrophilic Addition Reactions
147The carbon that does 
notbecomeattached to the proton is the carbon

that is positively charged in the
carbocation.sp2PROBLEM 3For each of the following reaction coordinate diagrams,tell whether the structure of the
transition state will more closely resemble the structure of the reactants or the structure of
the products:4.4Regioselectivity of Electrophilic 
Addition ReactionsWhen an alkene that does not have the same substituents on its carbons undergoes
an electrophilic addition reaction,the electrophile can add to two different car-

bons. We have just seen that the major product of the reaction is the one obtained by

adding the electrophile to the carbon that results in the formation of the more sta-

ble carbocation (Section4.3). For example,when propene reacts with HCl,the proton

can add to the number-1 carbon (C-1) to form a secondary carbocation,or it can add to

the number-2 carbon (C-2) to form a primary carbocation. The secondary carbocation

is formed more rapidly because it is more stable than the primary carbocation. (Prima-

ry carbocations are so unstable that they form only with great difficulty.) The product

of the reaction,therefore,is 2-chloropropane.
The major product obtained from the addition of HI to 2-methyl-2-butene is 2-iodo-
2-methylbutane; only a small amount of 2-iodo-3-methylbutane is obtained. The

major product obtained from the addition of HBr to 1-methylcyclohexene is 1-bromo-

1-methylcyclohexane. In both cases,the more stable tertiary carbocation is formed

more rapidly than the less stable secondary carbocation,so the major product of each

reaction is the one that results from forming the tertiary carbocation.CH3CHCCH
32-methyl-2-butene2-iodo-2-methylbutanemajor product1-methylcyclohexene1-bromo-1-methyl-
cyclohexanemajor product2-iodo-3-methylbutaneminor productCH3CH3CH3ICH3ICH3CH2CCH3CH3CHCHCH3HIHBrH3CBr
1-bromo-2-methyl-cyclohexaneminor productCH3Br2-chloropropanea primary
carbocationCH3CHCH3CH3CHCH3Cla secondary
carbocationCH3CH2CH2CH3CHCH
2HClHCl21Clsp2sp2sp2b.c.a.d.BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 147
148CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesThe two different products in each of these reactions are called 
constitutional iso-mers
. Constitutional isomershave the same molecular formula,but differ in how
their atoms are connected. A reaction (such as either of those just shown) in which two

or more constitutional isomers could be obtained as products,but one of them pre-

dominates,is called a 
regioselective reaction
.There are degrees of regioselectivity:A reaction can be 
moderately regioselective,
highly regioselective,
or completely regioselective
. In a completely regioselective reac-
tion,one of the possible products is not formed at all. The addition of a hydrogen

halide to 2-methylpropene (where the two possible carbocations are tertiary and pri-

mary) is more highly regioselective than the addition of a hydrogen halide to

2-methyl-2-butene (where the two possible carbocations are tertiary and secondary)

because the two carbocations formed from 2-methyl-2-butene are closer in stability.
The addition of HBr to 2-pentene is not regioselective. Because the addition of a
proton to either of the carbons produces a secondary carbocation,both carbocation

intermediates have the same stability,so both will be formed equally easily. Thus,ap-

proximately equal amounts of the two alkyl halides will be formed.
We now have seen that if we want to predict the major product of an electrophilic
addition reaction,we must first determine the relative stabilities of the two possible

carbocation intermediates. In 1865,when carbocations and their relative stabilities

were not yet known,Vladimir Markovnikov published a paper in which he described a

way to predict the major product obtained from the addition of a hydrogen halide to an

unsymmetrical alkene. His shortcut is known as 
MarkovnikovÕs rule
:ÒWhen a hy-
drogen halide adds to an unsymmetrical alkene,the addition occurs in such a manner

that the halogen attaches itself to the double-bonded carbon atom of the alkene bearing

the lesser number of hydrogen atoms.ÓBecause is the first species that adds to the
alkene,most chemists rephrase Markovnikov
Õs rule as follows:
ÒThe hydrogen
addsto the carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens.
ÓAlthoughMarkovnikov devised his rule only for the addition of hydrogen halides,chemists now

use it for any addition reaction that involves adding a hydrogen to one of the car-

bons. As you study the alkene reactions in this chapter,you will see that not all of them

follow Markovnikov
Õs rule. Those that do
Ñthat is,the hydrogen 
does addto the 
carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens
Ñare called Markovnikov
addition reactions
. Those that do not follow Markovnikov
Õs ruleÑthat is,the hydro-
gen does not addto the carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydro-
gensÑare called anti-Markovnikov addition reactions
.Now that we understand the mechanisms of alkenes reactions,we can devise a rule
that applies to allalkene electrophilic addition reactions:
The electrophile
adds to thecarbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens
. This is the rule you
should remember because all electrophilic addition reactions follow this rule,so it will

keep you from having to memorize which reactions follow Markovnikov
Õsrule and
which ones donÕt.Using the rule that the electrophile adds to the carbon bonded to the greater
number of hydrogens is simply a quick way to determine the relative stabilities of the

intermediates that could be formed in the rate-determining step. You will get the same

answer,whether you identify the major product of an electrophilic addition reaction

by using the rule or whether you identify it by determining relative carbocation stabil-

ities. In the following reaction for example,is the electrophile:
ClCH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CHCH3HCl21Hsp2sp2sp2sp2sp2sp2H2-bromopentane2-penteneCH3CHCHCH
2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3HBrBr3-bromopentaneBrsp2Regioselectivity is the preferential
formation of one constitutional isomer
over another.
The electrophile adds to the carbon
that is bonded to the greater number of

hydrogens.
sp2BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 148
We can say that adds preferentially to C-1 because C-1 is bonded to two hydro-
gens,whereas C-2 is bonded to only one hydrogen. Or we can say that adds to C-1

because that results in the formation of a secondary carbocation,which is more stable

than the primary carbocation that would be formed if added to C-2.
PROBLEM 4What would be the major product obtained from the addition of HBr to each of the follow-
ing compounds?a.c.e.
b.d.f.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
a.What alkene should be used to synthesize 3-bromohexane?
The best way to answer this kind of question is to begin by listing all the alkenes that
could be used. Because you want to synthesize an alkyl halide that has a bromo sub-

stituent at the C-3 position,the alkene should have an carbon at that position. Two

alkenes fit the description:2-hexene and 3-hexene.
Because there are two possibilities,we next need to determine whether there is any ad-
vantage to using one over the other. The addition of to 2-hexene can form two dif-

ferent carbocations. Because they are both secondary carbocations,they have the same

stability; therefore,approximately equal amounts of each will be formed. As a result,

half of the product will be 3-bromohexane and half will be 2-bromohexane.
The addition of to either of the carbons of 3-hexene,on the other hand,forms
the same carbocation because the alkene is symmetrical. Therefore,all of the product

will be the desired 3-bromohexane.
sp2HH2-hexeneCH3CHCHCH
2CH2CH33-hexeneCH3CH2CHCHCH
2CH3sp23-bromohexaneCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3HBr?BrCH3CHCHCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CHCCH
3CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2HHHSection 4.4Regioselectivity of Electrophilic Addition Reactions
149Vladimir Vasilevich Markovnikov
(1837Ð1904)was born in Russia,the
son of an army officer. He was a pro-

fessor of chemistry at Kazan,Odessa,

and Moscow Universities. By synthe-

sizing rings containing four carbons
and seven carbons,he disproved the

notion that carbon could form only
five-and six-membered rings.
CH3CHCHCH
2CH2CH33-bromohexaneCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3BrBr2-bromohexaneCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3Br2-hexeneBrHBrHBrsecondarycarbocationsecondary
carbocation3-bromohexaneCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCHCH
2CH3Br3-hexeneHBrBronly one carbocation
is formedBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 149
150CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesMechanistic Tutorial:
Addition of HBr to an alkeneBecause all the alkyl halide formed from 3-hexene is 3-bromohexane,but only half the
alkyl halide formed from 2-hexene is 3-bromohexane,3-hexene is the best alkene to use

to prepare 3-bromohexane.
b.What alkene should be used to synthesize 2-bromopentane?
Either 1-pentene or 2-pentene could be used because both have an carbon at the C-2
position.When adds to 1-pentene,one of the carbocations that could be formed is secondary
and the other is primary. A secondary carbocation is more stable than a primary carbo-

cation,which is so unstable that little,if any,will be formed. Thus,2-bromopentane

will be the only product of the reaction.When adds to 2-pentene,on the other hand,each of the two carbocations that can be
formed is secondary. Both are equally stable,so they will be formed in approximately

equal amounts. Thus,only about half of the product of the reaction will be 2-bro-

mopentane. The other half will be 3-bromopentane.
Because all the alkyl halide formed from 1-pentene is 2-bromopentane,but only half
the alkyl halide formed from 2-pentene is 2-bromopentane,1-pentene is the best alkene

to use to prepare 2-bromopentane.Now continue on to answer the questions in Problem 5.
PROBLEM 5What alkene should be used to synthesize each of the following alkyl bromides?
a.c.
b.d.
BrCH2CH3BrCH2CHCH3BrCH3CCH3CH3BrCH3CCH3CH3CHCHCH
2CH32-bromopentaneCH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3Br2-penteneBr3-bromopentaneCH3CH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3BrBrHBrHBrHCH2CHCH2CH2CH32-bromopentaneCH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3Br1-penteneBrCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3HBrHBrH1-penteneCH2CHCH2CH2CH32-penteneCH3CHCHCH
2CH3sp22-bromopentaneHBr+?CH3CHCH2CH2CH3BrBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 150
Section 4.5Addition of Water and Addition of Alcohols
151Mechanistic Tutorial:
Addition of water to an
alkenePROBLEM 6The addition of HBr to which of the following alkenes is more highly regioselective?
a.b.
4.5Addition of Water and Addition of Alcohols
Addition of Water
When water is added to an alkene,no reaction takes place,because there is no elec-
trophile present to start a reaction by adding to the nucleophilic alkene. The OH

bonds of water are too strong
Ñwater is too weakly acidic
Ñto allow the hydrogen to
act as an electrophile for this reaction.If,however,an acid (e.g.,or HCl) is added to the solution,a reaction will occur
because the acid provides an electrophile. The product of the reaction is an alcohol.

The addition of water to a molecule is called 
hydration
,so we can say that an alkene
will be hydrated
in the presence of water and acid.
and HCl are strong acids,so they dissociate al-
most completely in an aqueous solution (Section1.17). The acid that participates in

the reaction,therefore,is most apt to be a hydronium ion 
The first two steps of the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed addition of water to an
alkene are essentially the same as the two steps of the mechanism for the addition of a hy-

drogen halide to an alkene:The electrophile adds to the carbon that is bonded to

the greater number of hydrogens,and the nucleophile adds to the other carbon.
sp2(H2O)sp2(H)hydronium ionH2SO4HSO4ÐH2OH3O+(H3O).pa7H2SO4 pa52-propanolOHH
CH3CHCH
3CHCH
2CH2H2OHH2SO4CH3CHCH2H2Ono reaction
CH2CH3orCH3CH2CCH
2orCH3CHCH3CH3CH3CCH3CHCH
2CH3CHCH3HOH
H2OCH
3CHCH3OHHHslowfastfastH2OCH3CHCH3H3OOHmechanism for the acid-catalyzed addition of wateraddition ofthe electrophileaddition of
the nucleophilea protonated
alcoholH2O removes a proton, regenerating
the acid catalystan alcoholBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 151
152CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenes*At a pH of 4,for example,the concentration of is whereas the concentration of
water in a dilute aqueous solution is 55.5M.
11010 M,HOAs we saw in Section3.7,the addition of the electrophile to the alkene is relatively
slow,and the subsequent addition of the nucleophile to the carbocation occurs rapidly.

The reaction of the carbocation with a nucleophile is so fast that the carbocation com-

bines with whatever nucleophile it collides with first. In the previous hydration reac-

tion,there were two nucleophiles in solution:water and the counterion of the acid
that was used to start the reaction. (Notice that is not a nucleophile in
this reaction because there is no appreciable concentration of in an acidic solu-

tion.)*Because the concentration of water is much greater than the concentration of

the counterion,the carbocation is much more likely to collide with water. The product

of the collision is a protonated alcohol. Because the pH of the solution is greater than

the of the protonated alcohol (remember that protonated alcohols are very strong

acids; see Sections1.17and 1.19),the protonated alcohol loses a proton,and the final

product of the addition reaction is an alcohol. A reaction coordinate diagram for the

reaction is shown in Figure4.5.
paHOHO(e.g., Cl)CH3CHCH
2H3O+H3O+HCH3CHCH3H2O+CH3CHCH3OHCH3CHCH3OH+Free energyProgress of the reactionFigure 4.5
A reaction coordinate diagram forthe acid-catalyzed addition of
water to an alkene.Synthetic Tutorial:
Addition of water to an
alkeneA proton adds to the alkene in the first step,but a proton is returned to the reaction
mixture in the final step. Overall,a proton is not consumed. A species that increases

the rate of a reaction and is not consumed during the course of the reaction is called a

catalyst. Catalysts increase the reaction rate by decreasing the activation energy of the
reaction (Section3.7). Catalysts do 
notaffect the equilibrium constant of the reaction.
In other words,a catalyst increases the 
rate
at which a product is formed,but does not
affect the 
amountof product formed. The catalyst in the hydration of an alkene is an
acid,so the reaction is said to be an 
acid-catalyzed reaction
.PROBLEM 7The of a protonated alcohol is about and the of an alcohol is about 15.
Therefore,as long as the pH of the solution is greater than _____ and less than _____,

more than 50% of 2-propanol (the product of the previous reaction) will be in its neutral,

nonprotonated form.PROBLEM 8Use Figure4.5to answer the following questions about the acid-catalyzed hydration of an

alkene:
pa2.5paBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 152
Section 4.5Addition of Water and Addition of Alcohols
153a.How many transition states are there?
b.How many intermediates are there?

c.Which is more stable,the protonated alcohol or the neutral alcohol?

d.Of the six steps in the forward and reverse directions,which are the two fastest?
PROBLEM 9Give the major product obtained from the acid-catalyzed hydration of each of the follow-
ing alkenes:
a.c.
b.d.
Addition of AlcoholsAlcohols react with alkenes in the same way that water does. Like the addition of
water,the addition of an alcohol requires an acid catalyst. The product of the reaction

is an ether.
The mechanism for the acid-catalyzed addition of an alcohol is essentially the same
as the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed addition of water.
PROBLEM 10a.Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
1.3.
2.4.
b.What do all the reactions have in common?
c.How do all the reactions differ?
HCH3CCH
2CH3OHCH3CH3CCH
2HBrCH3HCH3CCH
2H2OCH3CH3CCH
2HClCH3CH3CHCH
2CH2CH3CHCH3OHOCH3H2-methoxypropaneHCH2CH3CH2CH2CHCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH3CHCH
2CH3CHCH3HOCH
3CH3OHCH
3CHCH3OCH3HHslowfast
fastCH3OHCH3CHCH3CH3OHOCH3Han etherBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 153
154CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesSynthetic Tutorial:
Addition of alcohol to an
alkeneFrank (Rocky) Clifford Whitmore
(1887Ð1947)was born in Massachu-
setts. He received a Ph.D. from

Harvard University and was a profes-

sor of chemistry at Minnesota,

Northwestern,and Pennsylvania

State Universities. Whitmore never

slept a full night; when he got tired,

he took a one-hour nap. Consequent-
ly,he had the reputation of being an

indefatigable worker; 20-hour work-

days were common. He generally had

30 graduate students working in his

lab at a time,and he wrote an ad-

vanced textbook that was considered

a milestone in the field of organic

chemistry.
3,3-dimethyl-1-butene3-chloro-2,2-dimethylbutaneminor product2-chloro-2,3-dimethylbutanemajor productCH3CCH
2CHCHCH3CHCH3HClCH3CCH
3CCH3CH3ClCH3ClCH3CH3CH3PROBLEM 11How could the following compounds be prepared,using an alkene as one of the starting
materials?a.d.b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 12Propose a mechanism for the following reaction (remember to use curved arrows when
showing a mechanism):
4.6Rearrangement of CarbocationsSome electrophilic addition reactions give products that are clearly not the result of the
addition of an electrophile to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydro-

gens and the addition of a nucleophile to the other carbon. For example,the addi-

tion of HBr to 3-methyl-1-butene forms 2-bromo-3-methylbutane (minor product) and

2-bromo-2-methylbutane (major product). 2-Bromo-3-methylbutane is the product

you would expect from the addition of to the carbon bonded to the greater

number of hydrogens and to the other carbon. 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane is an

Òunexpected
Óproduct,even though it is the major product of the reaction.
In another example,the addition of HCl to 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene forms both
3-chloro-2,2-dimethylbutane (an 
Òexpected
Óproduct) and 2-chloro-2,3-dimethylbu-
tane (an Òunexpected product
Ó). Again,the unexpected product is obtained in greater
yield.3-methyl-1-butene2-bromo-3-methylbutaneminor product2-bromo-2-methylbutanemajor productCH3CHCHCH
2HBrCH3CHCHCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3BrBrCH3sp2Brsp2Hsp2sp2CH3CHCH2CH2OHCH
3CCH
3CHCH2CH2OCCH3CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3H+ CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH3CH2OCHCH2CH3OHCH3CH3CH3OCCH3CH3CHCH2CH3OHOCH3BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 154
Section 4.6Rearrangement of Carbocations
155F.C. Whitmorewas the first to suggest that the unexpected product results from a
rearrangement
of the carbocation intermediate. Not all carbocations rearrange. In fact,
none of the carbocations that we have seen up to this point rearranges. Carbocations

rearrange only if they become more stable as a result of the rearrangement. For exam-

ple,when an electrophile adds to 3-methyl-1-butene,a 
secondarycarbocation isformed initially. However,the secondary carbocation has a hydrogen that can shift

with its pair of electrons to the adjacent positively charged carbon,creating a more sta-

ble tertiarycarbocation.As a result of 
carbocation rearrangement
,two alkyl halides are formed
Ñone fromthe addition of the nucleophile to the unrearranged carbocation and one from the addi-
tion to the rearranged carbocation. The major product is the rearranged one. Because a

shift of a hydrogen with its pair of electrons is involved in the rearrangement,it is

called a hydride shift. (Recall that is a hydride ion.) More specifically it is called

a 1,2-hydride shift
because the hydride ion moves from one carbon to an 
adjacentcarbon. (Notice that this does not mean that it moves from C-1 to C-2.)
3,3-Dimethyl-1-butene adds an electrophile to form a 
secondarycarbocation. In
this case,a methyl group can shift with its pair of electrons to the adjacent positively

charged carbon to form a more stable 
tertiarycarbocation. This kind of shift is called
a 1,2-methyl shift
. (It should have been called a 1,2-methide shift to make it analo-
gous to a 1,2-hydride shift,but,for some reason,it was not so named.)
A shift involves only the movement of a species from one carbon to an adjacent
electron-deficient carbon; 1,3-shifts normally do not occur. Furthermore,if the re-

arrangement does not lead to a more stable carbocation,then a carbocation rearrange-

ment does not occur. For example,when a proton adds to 4-methyl-1-pentene,a

secondary carbocation is formed. A 1,2-hydride shift would form a different secondary

carbocation. Because both carbocations are equally stable,there is no energetic advan-

tage to the shift. Consequently,rearrangement does not occur,and only one alkyl

halide is formed.H3,3-dimethyl-1-butenea secondary carbocationa tertiary carbocationCH3CCHCH
2HCl
minor productCH3CCHCH
3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3ClH3CClClmajor productCH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3Claddition to the
rearranged
carbocationaddition to theunrearranged
carbocationa 1,2-methyl shift3-methyl-1-butenea secondary carbocationa tertiary carbocationCH3CHCHCH
2HBr
Brminor productCH3CCHCH
3CH3CCH
2CH3CH3CH3HCH3CH3CHCHCH
3CH3Braddition to the
rearranged
carbocationaddition to theunrearranged
carbocationBrmajor productCH3CCH
2CH3CH3Bra 1,2-hydride shiftRearrangement involves a change in theway the atoms are connected.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 155
156CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesCarbocation rearrangements also can occur by ring expansion
,another type of
1,2-shift. In the following example,a secondary carbocation is formed initially:
Ring expansion leads to a more stable carbocation
Ñit is tertiary rather than secondary,
and a five-membered ring has less angle strain than a four-membered ring (Section2.11).
In subsequent chapters,you will study other reactions that involve the formation
of carbocation intermediates. Keep in mind that 
whenever a reaction leads to the
formation of a carbocation,you must check its structure for the possibility of

rearrangement
.PROBLEM 13SOLVED
Which of the following carbocations would you expect to rearrange?
a.c.e.
b.d.
SOLUTIONa.This carbocation will rearrange because a 1,2-hydride shift will convert a primary car-
bocation into a tertiary carbocation.b.This carbocation will not rearrange because it is tertiary and its stability cannot be im-
proved by a carbocation rearrangement.
c.This carbocation will rearrange because a 1,2-hydride shift will convert a secondary
carbocation into a tertiary carbocation.CH3HCH3CH2HCH3CH3CH2 CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH243214321CHCH3CH3CH3HBrCH3CH3BrCH34-methyl-1-penteneCH3CHCH2CHCH
2CH3CHCH2CHCH3HBrCH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CHCH3CH3BrCH3CHCHCH2CH3the carbocation doesnot rearrangeBrBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 156
Section 4.7Addition of Halogens
157d.This carbocation will not rearrange because it is a secondary carbocation and a carbo-
cation rearrangement would yield another secondary carbocation.
e.This carbocation will rearrange because a 1,2-hydride shift will convert a secondary
carbocation into a tertiary carbocation.PROBLEM 14Give the major product(s) obtained from the reaction of each of the following with HBr:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
4.7Addition of HalogensThe halogens and add to alkenes. This may be surprising because it is not im-
mediately apparent that an electrophile
Ñwhich is necessary to start an electrophilic
addition reactionÑis present.However,the bond joining the two halogen atoms is relatively weak (see the bond dis-
sociation energies listed in Table3.1) and,therefore,easily broken. When the elec-

trons of the alkene approach a molecule of or one of the halogen atoms

accepts the electrons and releases the shared electrons to the other halogen atom.

Therefore,in an electrophilic addition reaction,behaves as if it were and 
and behaves as if itwere and Cl
.ClCl2Br,BrBr2Cl2,Br2pCH3CHCH
2Br2BrBrClClCH3CHCH
2Cl2CH3CHCH
2CH3CHCH
2Cl2Br2CH3CH3CHCH2CHCH
2CH3CH2    CHCCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH    CH2CH3CH3CCH3HCHCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3In any reaction that forms a carbocation
intermediate, always check to see if the
carbocation will rearrange.
a bromonium ion1,2-dibromoethanea vicinal dibromideCH2H2CBrBrBrBr
BrCH2H2CBrCH2CH2BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 157
158CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenes3-D Molecule:Cyclic bromonium ion of
cis-2-buteneMechanistic Tutorial:
Addition of halogens to
alkenesThe product of the first step is not a carbocation; rather,it is a cyclic bromonium ion
because bromineÕs electron cloud is close enough to the other carbon to engage in
bond formation. The cyclic bromonium ion is more stable than the carbocation would

have been,since all the atoms (except hydrogen) in the bromonium ion have complete

octets,whereas the positively charged carbon of the carbocation does not have a com-

plete octet. (To review the octet rule,see Section1.3.)
In the second step of the reaction,attacks a carbon atom of the bromonium ion.
This releases the strain in the three-membered ring and forms a vicinal dibromide
.Vicinal
indicates that the two bromine atoms are on adjacent carbons (
vicinusis theLatin word for 
ÒnearÓ). The electrostatic potential maps for the cyclic bromonium ions
show that the electron-deficient region (the blue area) encompasses the carbons,even

though the formal positive charge is on the bromine atom.
When adds to an alkene,a cyclic chloronium ion intermediate is formed. The
final product of the reaction is a vicinal dichloride.
Because a carbocation is not formed when or adds to an alkene,carbocation
rearrangements do not occur in these reactions.PROBLEM 15What would have been the product of the preceding reaction if HBr had been used as a
reagent instead of PROBLEM 16a.How does the first step in the reaction of ethene with differ from the first step in the
reaction of ethene with HBr?b.To understand why attacks a carbon atom of the bromonium ion rather than the
positively charged bromine atom,draw the product that would be obtained if 
didattack the bromine atom.Reactions of alkenes with or are generally carried out by mixing the alkene
and the halogen in an inert solvent,such as dichloromethane that readily
(CH2Cl2),Cl2Br2BrBrBr2Br2  ?1,2-dibromo-3-methylbutanea vicinal dibromide3-methyl-1-buteneCH2Cl2CH2CH3CH3CH3CHCHCH
3CHCHCH2BrBr2Brthe carbon skeletondoes not rearrangeCl2Br21,2-dichloro-2-methylpropanea vicinal dichloride2-methylpropeneCH2Cl2CH2CH3CH3CH3CCH
3CCH2ClCl2ClCl2BrBrBrCH2CH2H2CH2CCH2H2CBrBrBrBrless stablemore stable
sp2cyclic bromonium ionof ethenecyclic bromonium ionof cis-2-buteneBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 158
Section 4.7Addition of Halogens
159dissolves both reactants,but does not participate in the reaction. The foregoing reac-
tions illustrate the way in which organic reactions are typically written. The reactants

are placed to the left of the reaction arrow,and the products are placed to the right of

the arrow. The reaction conditions,such as the solvent,the temperature,or any re-

quired catalyst,are written above or below the arrow. Sometimes reactions are written

by placing only the organic (carbon-containing) reagent on the left-hand side of the

arrow and writing the other reagent(s) above or below the arrow.
and are halogens,but they are not used as reagents in electrophilic addition re-
actions. Fluorine reacts explosively with alkenes,so the electrophilic addition of is

not a synthetically useful reaction. The addition of to an alkene is a thermodynami-

cally unfavorable reaction:The vicinal diiodides are unstable at room temperature,de-

composing back to the alkene and 
If rather than is used as the solvent,the major product of the reaction
will be a vicinal halohydrin. A 
halohydrin
(or more specifically,a bromohydrin or a
chlorohydrin) is an organic molecule that contains both a halogen and an OH group. In

a vicinal halohydrin,the halogen and the OH group are bonded to adjacent carbons.
The mechanism for halohydrin formation involves the formation of a cyclic bromo-
nium ion (or chloronium ion) in the first step of the reaction,because (or ) is

the only electrophile in the reaction mixture. In the second step,the bromonium ion

rapidly reacts with whatever nucleophile it bumps into. In other words,the elec-

trophile and nucleophile do not have to come from the same molecule. There are two

nucleophiles present in solution:and Because is the solvent,its con-

centration far exceeds that of Consequently,the bromonium ion is more likely to

collide with a molecule of water than with The protonated halohydrin that is

formed is a strong acid (Section1.19),so it loses a proton.
Br.Br.H2OBr.H2OClBrpropenea bromohydrinmajor productminor productOHBrH2OCH2Br2HBrCH3CHCH2BrCH3CHCH2BrCH3CH2-methyl-2-butenea chlorohydrinmajor productminor productCH3OHClClH2OCCH3Cl2HClCH3CHClCCH3CH3CHCCH3CH3CHCH3CH3CH2Cl2H2OIICH2Cl2CHCH3I2CH3CHCHCH3CH3CHI2.I2F2I2F2ClClCH2Cl2Cl2CHCH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CHCH2CH3CHBrH3OBrBrBrBrCH2OHHCH3CHCH3CHCH2BrOHCH3CHCH2slowH2OfastH2Ofastmechanism for halohydrin formationSynthetic Tutorial:
Addition of halogens to
alkenesBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 159
160CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesHow can we explain the regioselectivity of the preceding addition reaction? The
electrophile ends up on the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydro-

gens because,in the transition state for the second step of the reaction,the breaking of

the CBr bond has occurred to a greater extent than has the formation of the CO

bond. As a result,there is a partial positive charge on the carbon that is attacked by the

nucleophile.Therefore,the more stable transition state is achieved by adding the nucleophile to the
most substituted carbon
Ñthe one bonded to the 
lesser numberof hydrogens
Ñbecause the partial positive charge will be on a secondary carbon rather than on a pri-

mary carbon. Thus,this reaction also follows the general rule for electrophilic addition

reactions:The electrophile adds to the carbon that is bonded to the greater number

of hydrogens. In this case,the electrophile is 
When nucleophiles other than are added to the reaction mixture,they,too,
change the product of the reaction,just as water changed the product of addition

from a vicinal dibromide to a vicinal bromohydrin. Because the concentration of the

added nucleophile will be greater than the concentration of the halide ion generated
from or the added nucleophile will be the nucleophile most likely to partici-

pate in the second step of the reaction. (Ions such as and cannot form covalent

bonds,so they do not react with organic compounds. They serve only as counterions to

negatively charged species,so their presence generally is ignored in writing chemical

equations.)PROBLEM 17There are two nucleophiles in each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.d.For each reaction,explain why there is a greater concentration of one nucleophile than the
other. What will be the major product of each reaction?
CH3OHCHCH3HBrCH3CHCHCH3HClH2OCH3CHCHCH32 NaIHBr
CH2CCH3Cl2CH3OHCH2CH3CCH3CH3CH3OCH3ClCl2CH3OHCH
3CHCCH3CH3CHCH2ClBr2NaClCH
3CHCH2BrCH3CHNaBrHClKNaCl2,Br2Br2H2OBr.sp2sp2OCH3CHCH2HHmore stable transition stateBrOCH3CHCH2HHless stable transition stateBrsp2(Br)Do not memorize the products of alkene
addition reactions. Instead, for each re-

action, ask yourself, ÒWhat is the elec-
trophile?Ó and ÒWhat nucleophile is

present in the greatest concentration?Ó
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 160
PROBLEM 18Why are and unable to form covalent bonds?
PROBLEM 19What will be the product of the addition of I
ÐCl to 1-butene? [
Hint:Chlorine is more elec-
tronegative than iodine (Table1.3).]
PROBLEM 20What would be the major product obtained from the reaction of with 1-butene if the re-

action were carried out ina.dichloromethane?c.ethyl alcohol?
b.water?d.methyl alcohol?
4.8OxymercurationÐReduction 
and AlkoxymercurationÐReduction
In Section4.5,you learned that water adds to an alkene if an acid catalyst is present.
This is the way alkenes are converted into alcohols industrially. However,under nor-

mal laboratory conditions,water is added to an alkene by a procedure known as

oxymercurationÐreduction
. The addition of water by oxymercuration
Ðreduction hastwo advantages over acid-catalyzed addition:It does not require acidic conditions that

are harmful to many organic molecules,and because carbocation intermediates are not

formed,carbocation rearrangements do not occur.
In oxymercuration,the alkene is treated with mercuric acetate in aqueous tetrahy-
drofuran (THF). When reaction with that reagent is complete,sodium borohydride is

added to the reaction mixture. (The numbers 1 and 2 in front of the reagents above and

below the arrow in the chemical equation indicate two sequential reactions; the second

reagent is not added until reaction with the first reagent is completely over.)
In the first step of the oxymercuration mechanism,the electrophilic mercury of
mercuric acetate adds to the double bond. (Two of mercury
Õs 5delectrons are shown.)
Because carbocation rearrangements do not occur,we can conclude that the product of

the addition reaction is a cyclic mercurinium ion rather than a carbocation. The reac-

tion is analogous to the addition of to an alkene to form a cyclic bromonium ion.
CH2CH3CHHgOAcOAcHgHgOAcOAcOCH2OHHCH3CHCH3CHCH2OAcHgOHCH3CHCH2H2OAcOHAcOAcOCH3COOAcmechanism for oxymercurationBr2R21. Hg(OAc)2, H2O/THF2. NaBH4 CHCH
RCHOHCH3Br2KNaSection 4.8OxymercurationÐReduction and AlkoxymercurationÐReduction
161Synthetic Tutorial:
Halohydrin reactionBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 161
162CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesMechanistic Tutorial:
OxymercurationÐreductionSynthetic Tutorial:
OxymercurationÐreductionReduction increases the number of 
CH bonds or decreases the number of

CO, CN, or CX bonds.
In the secondstepof the reaction,water attacks the more substituted carbon of the
mercurinium ion
Ñthe one bonded to the lesser number of hydrogens
Ñfor the samereason that it attacks the more substituted carbon of the bromonium ion in the halohy-
drin reaction (Section4.7). That is,attacking at the more substituted carbon leads to

the more stable transition state.Sodium borohydride converts the CHg bond into a CH bond. A reac-
tion that increases the number of CH bonds or decreases the number of CO,

CN,or CX bonds in a compound (where X denotes a halogen),is called a

reduction reaction
. Consequently,the reaction with sodium borohydride is a reduc-
tion reaction. The mechanism of the reduction reaction is not fully understood,al-

though it is known that the intermediate is a radical.
The overall reaction (oxymercuration
Ðreduction) forms the same product that would
be formed from the acid-catalyzed addition of water:The hydrogen adds to the car-

bon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens,and OH adds to the other carbon.
We have seen that alkenes react with alcohols in the presence of an acid catalyst to
form ethers (Section4.5). Just as the addition of water works better in the presence of

mercuric acetate than in the presence of a strong acid,the addition of an alcohol works

better in the presence of mercuric acetate. [Mercuric trifluoroacetate,

works even better.] This reaction is called 
alkoxymercurationÐreduction.
The mechanisms for oxymercuration and alkoxymercuration are essentially identi-
cal; the only difference is that water is the nucleophile in oxymercuration and an

alcohol is the nucleophile in alkoxymercuration. Therefore,the product of oxymercu-

rationÐreduction is an alcohol,whereas the product of alkoxymercuration
Ðreduction isan ether.
PROBLEM 21How could the following compounds be synthesized from an alkene?
a.c.
b.d.
CH3OCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3OHCH3CHCH2CH3OCH2CH3OCH2CH31. Hg(O2CCF3)2, CH3OH1-methoxy-1-methylcyclohexanean ether1-methylcyclohexene2. NaBH4CH3H3COCH
3Hg(O2CCF3)2,sp2sp2OHOHHgOAcNaBH4CH3CHCH2CH3CHCH3HgAcO

(NaBH4)OCH3CHCH2HHHgOAcHgOAcOCH3CHCH2HH
more stable transition stateless stable transition stateBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 162
PROBLEM 22How could the following compounds be synthesized from 3-methyl-1-butene?
a.b.
4.9Addition of Borane: Hydroboration
ÐOxidationAn atom or a molecule does not have to be positively charged to be an electrophile.
Borane a neutral molecule,is an electrophile because boron has only six shared

electrons in its valence shell. Boron,therefore,readily accepts a pair of electrons in

order to complete its octet. Thus,alkenes undergo electrophilic addition reactions with

borane serving as the electrophile. When the addition reaction is over,an aqueous so-

lution of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide is added to the reaction mixture,

and the resulting product is an alcohol. The addition of borane to an alkene,followed

by reaction with hydroxide ion and hydrogen peroxide,is called 
hydroborationÐ
oxidation. The overall reaction was first reported by H.C. Brownin 1959.
The alcohol that is formed from the hydroboration
Ðoxidation of an alkene has the H
and OH groups on opposite carbons,compared with the alcohol that is formed from

the acid-catalyzed addition of water (Section4.5). In other words,the reaction violates

Markovnikov
Õs rule. Thus,hydroboration
Ðoxidation is an anti-Markovnikov addition
reaction. However,you will see that the general rule for electrophilic addition reac-

tions is not violated:
The electrophile adds to the carbon that is bonded to the
greater number of hydrogens
. The reaction violates Markovnikov
Õs rule because hisrule states where the hydrogen adds,so the rule applies only if the electrophile is a hy-

drogen. The reaction does not violate the general rule because,as you will see,is

not the electrophile in hydroborationÐoxidation; is the electrophile and is the
nucleophile. This shows why it is better to understand the mechanism of a reaction

than to memorize rules. 
The first step in the mechanism of all alkene reactions is the
same:the addition of an electrophile to the carbon that is bonded to the greater
number of hydrogens.Because diborane the source of borane,is a flammable,toxic,explosive
gas,a solution of borane
Ñprepared by dissolving diborane in an ether such as THF
Ñis a more convenient and less dangerous reagent. One of the ether oxygen
Õs lone pairssatisfies boron
Õs requirement for an additional two electrons:The ether is a Lewis base
(B2H6),CH3CH2CH2OHCH3CHCH
21. BH3/THF 2. HO, H2O2, H2Opropene1-propanol
CH3CHCH3OHCH3CHCH
2H2SO4H2Opropene2-propanolsp2HBH3Hsp2CH2      CH2CH2CH21. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2, H2OHOH
an alcohol(BH3),CH3CHCH2CH3OHCH3CH3OHCH3CCH2CH3Section 4.9Addition of Borane: Hydroboration
ÐOxidation163Herbert Charles Brown
was born inLondon in 1921 and was brought to

the United States by his parents at

age two. He received a Ph.D. from

the University of Chicago and has

been a professor of chemistry at

Purdue University since 1947. For

his studies on boron-containing or-

ganic compounds,he shared the 1979

Nobel Prize in chemistry with 

G. Wittig.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 163
164CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenesand borane is a Lewis acid. So the reagent actually used as the source of for the
first step of hydroboration
Ðoxidation is a boraneÐTHFcomplex.
To understand why the hydroboration
Ðoxidation of propene forms 1-propanol,we
must look at the mechanism of the reaction. The boron atom of borane is electron de-

ficient,so borane is the electrophile that reacts with the nucleophilic alkene. As boron

accepts the electrons and forms a bond with one carbon,it donates a hydride ion

to the other carbon. In all the addition reactions that we have seen up to this point,

the electrophile adds to the alkene in the first step and the nucleophile adds to the pos-

itively charged intermediate in the second step. In contrast,the addition of the elec-

trophilic boron and the nucleophilic hydride ion to the alkene take place in one step.

Therefore,an intermediate is not formed.
The addition of borane to an alkene is an example of a 
concertedreaction. Aconcerted reaction
is a reaction in which all the bond-making and bond-breakingprocesses occur in a single step. The addition of borane to an alkene is also an example

of a pericyclicreaction. (Pericyclic
means Òaround the circle.Ó) A pericyclic reaction
isa concerted reaction that takes place as the result of a cyclic rearrangement of electrons.
The electrophilic boron adds to the carbon that is bonded to the greater number
of hydrogens. The electrophiles that we have looked at previously (e.g.,) also added

to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens,in order to form the most

stable carbocation intermediate. Given that an intermediate is not formed in this con-

certed reaction,how can we explain the regioselectivity of the reaction. Why does

boron add preferentially to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens?
If we examine the two possible transition states for the addition of borane,we see
that the CB bond has formed to a greater extent than has the CH bond. Conse-

quently,the carbon that does not become attached to boron has a partial positive

charge. The partial positive charge is on a secondary carbon if boron adds to the 

carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens. The partial positive charge is on a

primary carbon if boron adds to the other carbon. So,even though a carbocation

intermediate is not formed,a carbocation-like transition state is formed. Thus,the ad-

dition of borane and the addition of an electrophile such as take place at the same
Hsp2sp2sp2sp2sp2Hsp2CH2BH2HCH3CH     CH2CH3CHBH2Han alkylboranesp2sp2pBHHH2OOdiboranetetrahydrofuranTHFHHHHHHBBBH33-D Molecule:DiboraneMovie:BoraneÐTHF complexBORANE AND DIBORANEBorane exists primarily as a colorless gas called
diborane. Diborane is a 
dimerÑa moleculeformed by joining two identical molecules. Because boron is

surrounded by only six electrons,it has a strong tendency to ac-

quire an additional electron pair. Two boron atoms,therefore,

share the two electrons in a hydrogen
Ðboron bond in unusualhalf-bonds. The hydrogen
Ðboron bonds in diborane are shown
as dotted lines to indicate that the bond is made up of fewer
than the normal two electrons.
B2HHHboraneBBHHHHHHdiboraneBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 164
Section 4.9Addition of Borane: Hydroboration
ÐOxidation165carbon for the same reason:to form the more stable carbocation or carbocation-
like transitionstate.
The alkylboraneformed in the first step of the reaction reacts with another mole-
cule of alkene to form a dialkylborane,which then reacts with yet another molecule of

alkene to form a trialkylborane. In each of these reactions,boron adds to the car-

bon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens and the nucleophilic hydride ion adds
to the other carbon.
The alkylborane is a bulkier molecule than because R is a larger sub-
stituent than H. The dialkylborane with two R groups is even bulkier than the

alkylborane. Thus,there are now two reasons for the alkylborane and the dialkylbo-

rane to add to the carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens:first,

to achieve the 
most stable carbocation-like transition state
,and second,because there
is more room
at this carbon for the bulky group to attach itself. 
Steric effectsarespace-filling effects. 
Steric hindrancerefers to bulky groups at the site of the reaction
that make it difficult for the reactants to approach each other. Steric hindrance associ-

ated with the alkylborane
Ñand particularly with the dialkylborane
Ñcauses the addi-tion to occur at the carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens

because that is the least sterically hindered of the two carbons. Therefore,in each

of the three successive additions to the alkene,boron adds to the carbon that is

bonded to the greater number of hydrogens and adds to the other carbon.
When the hydroboration reaction is over,aqueous sodium hydroxide and hydrogen
peroxide are added to the reaction mixture. Notice that both hydroxide ion and hy-

droperoxide ion are reagents in the reaction:The end result is replacement of boron by an OH group. Because replacing boron by
an OH group is an oxidation reaction
,the overall reaction is called hydroboration
Ðoxidation. An oxidation reaction
increases the number of CO,CN,or CX
bonds in a compound (where X denotes a halogen),or it decreases the number of 

CH bonds.
HO, H2O2, H2OROHBO
3RRRB33HOOHHOHOOH2Osp2Hsp2sp2sp2sp2(R2BH)BH3(RBH2)an alkylboranea dialkylboraneCH3CHCH
2BH2a dialkylboranea trialkylborane
CH3CHCH
2BHCH3CHCH2BHR
HCH3CHCH
2BRHRRRRsp2sp2sp2CH3CCH
HHBH2CH3CCH
HHHless stabletransition statemore stabletransition stateaddition of BH3addition of HBrCH3CCH
HHBrH
more stabletransition stateCH3CCH
HHBrHless stabletransition stateHH2BOxidation decreases the number of 
CH bonds or increases the number of

CO, CN, or CX bonds.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 165
166CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesMechanistic Tutorial:
HydroborationÐoxidationSynthetic Tutorial:
HydroborationÐoxidationThe mechanism of the oxidation reaction shows that a hydroperoxide ion (a Lewis
base) reacts with (a Lewis acid). Then,a 1,2-alkyl shift displaces a hydroxide ion.

These two steps are repeated two more times. Then,hydroxide ion (a Lewis base) re-

acts with (a Lewis acid),and an alkoxide ion is eliminated. Protonation of the

alkoxide ion forms the alcohol. These three steps are repeated two more times.
We have seen that,in the overall hydroboration
Ðoxidation reaction,1 mole of 
reacts with 3 moles of alkene to form 3 moles of alcohol. The OH ends up on the 
carbon that was bonded to the greater number of hydrogens because it replaces
boron,which was the original electrophile in the reaction.
Because carbocation intermediates are not formed in the hydroboration reaction,car-
bocation rearrangements do not occur.
PROBLEM 23How many moles of are needed to react with 2 moles of 1-pentene?
PROBLEM 24What product would be obtained from hydroboration
Ðoxidation of the following alkenes?
a.2-methyl-2-buteneb.1-methylcyclohexene
BH3CH3CHCH3-methyl-1-butene3-methyl-1-butanol
CH2CH3CHCH2CH2OH1. BH3/THF2. HO,H2O2, H2O CH3CH3CH3CCH3,3-dimethyl-1-butene3,3-dimethyl-1-butanol
CH2CH3CCH2CH2OH1. BH3/THF2. HO,H2O2, H2O CH3CH3CH3CH3sp2BH3(RO)3BR3BCH2BH3(CH3CH2CH2)3B3 CH
3CH2CH2OHBO
3 CH3CHTHFHO
, H2O2H2O33RROH
BRrepeat the twopreceding stepstwo timesrepeat the threepreceding stepstwo timesORROH
BRORRB HOORORROB
OHOROROHROB
OROHORROB
ROOORROBROHBO333 ROHBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 166
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
A carbeneis an unusual carbon-containing species. It has a carbon with a lone pair of
electrons and an empty orbital. The empty orbital makes the carbene highly reactive. The

simplest carbene,methylene is generated by heating diazomethane. Propose a

mechanism for the following reaction:
The information provided is all you need to write a mechanism. First,because you know
the structure of methylene,you can see that it can be generated by breaking the CN

bond of diazomethane. Second,because methylene has an empty orbital,it is an elec-

trophile and,therefore,will react with ethene (a nucleophile). Now,the question is,What

nucleophile reacts with the other carbon of the alkene? Because you know that cyclo-

propane is the product of the reaction,you also know that the nucleophile must be the lone-

pair electrons of methylene.(Note:Diazomethane is a gas that must be handled with great care because it is both ex-
plosive and toxic.)
Now continue on to Problem 25.
PROBLEM 25Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
4.10Addition of Radicals ¥ The Relative Stabilities of RadicalsThe addition of HBr to 1-butene forms 2-bromobutane. But what if you wanted to
synthesize 1-bromobutane? The formation of 1-bromobutane requires the anti-

Markovnikov addition of HBr. If an alkyl peroxide (ROOR) is added to the reaction

mixture,the product of the addition reaction will be the desired 1-bromobutane. Thus,

the presence of a peroxide causes the anti-Markovnikov
addition of HBr.
A peroxide reverses the order of addition because it changes the mechanism of the
reaction in a way that causes to be the electrophile. Markovnikov
Õs rule is not fol-lowed because it applies only when the electrophile is a hydrogen. The general rule
Ñthat the electrophile adds to the carbon bonded to the greater number of
sp2BrBrCH3CH2CH1-butene2-bromobutane
CH2CH3CH2CHCH3HBrCH3CH2CH1-butene1-bromobutane
CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2BrHBrperoxideCCH2CHCH2OHCH3H3CH3COCH2CH3CH3H2SO4CH2N2NNCH2H2CCH
2sp2CH2NN2diazomethaneNH2CCH
2(CH2),Section 4.10Addition of Radicals 
¥ The Relative Stabilities of Radicals167BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 167
168CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkeneshydrogensÑisfollowed,however,because is the electrophile when HBr adds to an
alkene in the presence of a peroxide.
When a bond breaks such that both of its electrons stay with one of the atoms,the
process is called heterolytic bond cleavage
or heterolysis
. When a bond breaks such
that each of the atoms retains one of the bonding electrons,the process is called

homolytic bond cleavage
or homolysis. Remember that an arrowhead with two barbs
signifies the movement of two electrons,whereas an arrowhead with one barb
Ñsometimes called a fishhook
Ñsignifies the movement of a single electron.
An alkyl peroxide can be used to reverse the order of addition of H and Br to an
alkene. The akyl peroxide contains a weak oxygen
Ðoxygen single bond that is readilybroken homolytically in the presence of light or heat to form 
radicals
. A radical(alsocalled a free radical
) is a species with an unpaired electron.A radical is highly reactive because it seeks an electron to complete its octet. The
alkoxyl radical completes its octet by removing a hydrogen atom from a molecule of

HBr,forming a bromine radical.
The bromine radical now seeks an electron to complete its octet. Because the dou-
ble bond of an alkene is electron rich,the bromine radical completes its octet by com-

bining with one of the electrons of the bond of the alkene to form a CBr bond.

The second electron of the bond is the unpaired electron in the resulting alkyl radi-

cal. If the bromine radical adds to the carbon of 1-butene that is bonded to the

greater number of hydrogens,a secondary alkyl radical is formed. If the bromine rad-

ical adds to the other carbon,a primary alkyl radical is formed. Like carbocations,

radicals are stabilized by electron-donating alkyl groups,so a 
tertiary alkyl radical
ismore stable than a secondary alkyl radical
,which in turn is more stable than a
primary alkyl radical
. The bromine radical,therefore,adds to the carbon that is
bonded to the greater number of hydrogens,thereby forming the more stable (in this

case) secondary radical. The alkyl radical that is formed removes a hydrogen atom

from another molecule of HBr to produce a molecule of the alkyl halide product and

another bromine radical. Because the first species that adds to the alkene is a radical
the addition of HBr in the presence of a peroxide is called a 
radical additionreaction
.BrBrCH
2CHCH2CH3BrBrBrHBrHCH2CHCH2CH3an alkyl radicalCH2CHCH2CH3CH2       CHCH2CH3(Br),sp2sp2sp2ppBrRHOBra bromine radicalRHOORROan alkyl peroxidealkoxyl radicals
2 ROlightorBrHBrHBrHBrHheterolytic bond cleavagehomolytic bond cleavageBrRadical stability: tertiarysecondaryprimary
An arrowhead with two barbs signifies
the movement of two electrons.
An arrowhead with one barb signifies
the movement of one electron.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 168
Section 4.10Addition of Radicals 
¥ The Relative Stabilities of Radicals169When HBr reacts with an alkene in the absence of a peroxide,the electrophile
Ñthefirst species to add to the alkene
Ñis In the presence of a peroxide,the electrophile
is In both cases,the electrophile adds to the carbon that is bonded to the

greater number of hydrogens,so both reactions follow the general rule for elec-

trophilic addition reactions:The electrophile adds to the carbon that is bonded to
the greater number of hydrogens
.Because the addition of HBr in the presence of a peroxide forms a radical interme-
diate rather than a carbocation intermediate,the intermediate does not rearrange. Rad-

icals do not rearrange as readily as carbocations.As just mentioned,the relative stabilities of primary,secondary,and tertiary alkyl
radicals are in the same order as the relative stabilities of primary,secondary,and ter-

tiary carbocations. However,energy differences between the radicals are quite a bit

smaller than between the carbocations.The relative stabilities of primary,secondary,and tertiary alkyl radicals are reflect-
ed in the transition states leading to their formation (Section4.3). Consequently,the

more stable the radical,the less energy is required to make it. This explains why the

bromine radical adds to the carbon of 1-butene that is bonded to the greater num-

ber of hydrogens to form a secondary alkyl radical,rather than adding to the other 

carbon to form a primary alkyl radical. The secondary radical is more stable than the

primary radical; therefore,the energy barrier to its formation is lower.
The following mechanism for the addition of HBr to an alkene in the presence of a
peroxide involves seven steps. The steps can be divided into initiation steps,propaga-

tion steps,and termination steps:
CH2CH2BrBrCH3CCH
3CCH2CH3CH3BrBrHCH3CCH3propagationsteps3.4.HCH3C     CH2BrBrCH3initiation steps1.2.HROROHBr
BrROOR2 RO
sp2sp2RRCRtertiary radicalRRCHsecondary radicalHRCHprimary radicalHHCHmethyl radicalleaststablemost
stableCH3CH3CH3CHCH3-methyl-1-butene1-bromo-3-methylbutane
CH2CH3CHCH2CH2BrHBrperoxidecarbon skeleton isnot rearrangedsp2sp2Br.H.Radical intermediates do not rearrange.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 169
¥Initiation Steps.
The first step is an 
initiation stepbecause it creates radicals.The second step is also an initiation step because it forms the chain-propagating
radical ¥Propagation Steps.
Steps 3 and 4 are 
propagation steps
. In step 3,a radical
reacts to produce another radical. In step 4,the radical produced in the first
propagation step reacts to form the radical that was the reactant in the first

propagation step. The two propagation steps are repeated over and over. Hence,

the reaction is called a radical chain reaction
. A propagation step is a step that
propagates the chain.¥Termination Steps.
Steps 5,6,and 7 are 
termination steps
. In a terminationstep,two radicals combine to produce a molecule in which all the electrons are

paired,thus ending the role of those radicals in the radical chain reaction. Any

two radicals present in the reaction mixture can combine in a termination step,so

radical reactions produce a mixture of products.PROBLEM 26Write out the propagation steps that occur when HBr adds to 1-methylcyclohexene in the
presence of a peroxide.An alkyl peroxide is a 
radical initiatorbecause it creates radicals. Without a per-
oxide,the preceding radical reaction would not occur. Any reaction that occurs in the

presence of a radical initiator,but does not occur in its absence,must take place by a

mechanism that involves radicals as intermediates. Any compound that can readily un-

dergo homolysis
Ñdissociate to form radicals
Ñcan act as a radical initiator. Examples
of radical initiators are shown in Table28.3.
Whereas radical initiators cause radical reactions to occur,
radical inhibitorshave
the opposite effect:They trap radicals as they are formed,preventing reactions that

take place by mechanisms involving radicals. How radical inhibitors trap radicals is

discussed in Section9.8.
A peroxide has no effect on the addition of HCl or HI to an alkene. In the presence
of a peroxide,addition occurs just as it does in the absence of a peroxide.
Why is the 
peroxide effect
observed for the addition of HBr,but not for the addi-
tion of HCl or HI? This question can be answered by calculating the for the two

propagation steps in the radical chain reaction (using the bond dissociation energies in

Table3.1).
¡CH3CHCH
2CH3CHCH3HClperoxideClCH3CH3CH3CCH
2CH3CCH3HIperoxideI(Br)(Br)(Br).BrBr
BrBrBrBr
CH3CCH2BrCH3CH3CH3CCH2BrBrCH
2C2 CH3CCH2BrCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2Brtermination steps5.6.7.170CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 170
Section 4.11Addition of Hydrogen 
¥ The Relative Stabilities of Alkenes171For the radical addition of HCl,the first propagation step is exothermic and the sec-
ond is endothermic. For the radical addition of HI,the first propagation step is en-

dothermic and the second is exothermic. Only for the radical addition of HBr are both

propagation steps exothermic. In a radical reaction,the steps that propagate the chain

reaction compete with the steps that terminate it. Termination steps are always

exothermic,because only bond making (and no bond breaking) occurs. Therefore,

only when both propagation steps are exothermic can propagation compete with ter-

mination. When HCl or HI adds to an alkene in the presence of a peroxide,any chain

reaction that is initiated is terminated rather than propagated because propagation can-

not compete with termination. Consequently,the radical chain reaction does not occur,

and all we have is ionic addition (followed by or ).
4.11Addition of Hydrogen 
¥ The Relative Stabilities of AlkenesIn the presence of a metal catalyst such as platinum,palladium,or nickel,hydrogen
adds to the double bond of an alkene to form an alkane. Without the catalyst,the
energy barrier to the reaction would be enormous because the HH bond is so strong

(Table3.1). The catalyst decreases the energy of activation by breaking the HH

bond. Platinum and palladium are used in a finely divided state adsorbed on charcoal

(Pt/C,Pd/C). The platinum catalyst is frequently used in the form of which is

known as Adams catalyst.
The addition of hydrogen is called hydrogenation
. Because the preceding reac-tions require a catalyst,they are examples of 
catalytic hydrogenation
. The metal cat-
alysts are insoluble in the reaction mixture and therefore are classified as

heterogeneous catalysts
. A heterogeneous catalyst can easily be separated from the
reaction mixture by filtration. It can then be recycled,which is an important property,

since metal catalysts tend to be expensive.
CH3CHCH3CCH
2H2CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH32-butene2-methylpropenecyclohexenecyclohexane
2-methylpropanebutanePt/CH2Pd/CH2NiCH3CHCH3CH3PtO2,(H2)IClHMechanistic Tutorial:
Addition of HBr in the pres-
ence of a peroxideCH2ClCH2ClCH2CH2H  63 82  19 kcal/mol (or 79 kJ/mol)CH2BrCH2BrCH2CH2H  63 69  6 kcal/mol (or 25 kJ/mol)ClHClClCH2CH3ClCH2CH2H  103 101  2 kcal/mol (or 8 kJ/mol)CH2ICH2ICH2CH2H  63 55  8 kcal/mol (or 33 kJ/mol)IHIICH2CH3ICH2CH2H  71 101  30 kcal/mol (or 126 kJ/mol)BrHBrBrCH2CH3BrCH2CH2H  87 101  14 kcal/mol (or 59 kJ/mol)exothermicexothermicexothermicRoger Adams (1889Ð1971)
wasborn in Boston. He received a Ph.D.

from Harvard University and was a

professor of chemistry at the Univer-

sity of Illinois. He and Sir Alexander

Todd (Section27.1) clarified the

structure of tetrahydrocannabinol

(THC),the active ingredient of the

marijuana plant. Adams
Õs research
showed that the test commonly used
at that time by the Federal Bureau of

Narcotics to detect marijuana was

actually detecting an innocuous
companion compound.BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 171
172CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesThe details of the mechanism of catalytic hydrogenation are not completely under-
stood. We know that hydrogen is adsorbed on the surface of the metal and that the

alkene complexes with the metal by overlapping its own 
porbitals with vacant orbitals
of the metal. Breaking the bond of the alkene and the bond of and forming the

CH bonds all occur on the surface of the metal. The alkane product diffuses away

from the metal surface as it is formed (Figure4.6).
The heat released in a hydrogenation reaction is called the heat of hydrogenation
.It is customary to give it a positive value. Hydrogenation reactions,however,are

exothermic (they have negative values). So the heat of hydrogenation is the pos-

itive value of the of thereaction.
Because we do not know the precise mechanism of a hydrogenation reaction,we can-
not draw a reaction coordinate diagram for it. We can,however,draw a diagram showing

the relative energies of the reactants and products (Figure4.7). The preceding three cat-

alytic hydrogenation reactions all form the same alkane product,so the energy of the

product
is the same for each reaction. The three reactions,however,have different heats
of hydrogenation,so the three 
reactants
must have different energies. For example,
3-methyl-1-butene releases the most heat,so it must be the 
leaststable (have the greatest
energy) of the three alkenes. In contrast,2-methyl-2-butene releases the least heat,so it

must be the 
moststable of the three alkenes. Notice that the greater the stability of a com-
pound,the lower is its energy and the smaller is its heat of hydrogenation.
If you look at the structures of the three alkene reactants in Figure4.7,you will see
that the most stable alkene has two alkyl substituents bonded to one of the carbons

and one alkyl substituent bonded to the other carbon,for a total of three alkyl sub-

stituents (three methyl groups) bonded to its two carbons. The alkene of interme-

diate stability has a total of two alkyl substituents (a methyl group and an ethyl group)
sp2sp2sp2¡¡sH2spCH3CCHCH
3H2CH32-methyl-2-butenePt/CCH3CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH3H2CH32-methyl-1-butenePt/CCH3CHCH2CH3CH3CH3CHCHCH
2H2CH33-methyl-1-butenePt/CCH3CHCH2CH3CH3heat of hydrogenation
26.9 kcal/mol28.5 kcal/mol30.3 kcal/mol26.928.530.3113119127kcal/molkJ/mol
Hthe alkene approaches the surface of the catalystthe  bond between the two carbons is replaced by two
C    H  bondshydrogen molecules settleon the surface of the catalyst 
and react with the metal atomsHCHHHHHHHHHCCHHHHHHCCHHCHHHHHHHHHHHHFigure 4.6
Catalytic hydrogenation of analkene.The most stable alkene has the smallestheat of hydrogenation.
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 172
bonded to its carbons,and the least stable of the three alkenes has only one alkyl
substituent (an isopropyl group) bonded to its carbons. Thus,it is apparent that

alkyl substituents bonded to the carbons of an alkene have a stabilizing effect on

the alkene. We can,therefore,make the following statement:
The more alkyl sub-
stituents bonded to the carbons of an alkene,the greater is its stability.
(Some stu-dents find it easier to look at the number of hydrogens bonded to the carbons. In

terms of hydrogens,the statement is,
the fewer hydrogensbonded to the carbons of
an alkene,the greater is its stability.
)PROBLEM 27The same alkane is obtained from the catalytic hydrogenation of both alkene A and alkene
B. The heat of hydrogenation of alkene A is 29.8kcalmol (125kJmol),and the heat of

hydrogenation of alkene B is 31.4kcalmol (131kJmol). Which alkene is more stable?
PROBLEM 28a.Which of the following compounds is the most stable?
b.Which is the least stable?
c.Which has the smallest heat of hydrogenation?
Both trans
-2-butene and 
cis-2-butenehave two alkyl groups bonded to their 
carbons,but 
trans
-2-butenehas a smaller heat of hydrogenation. This means that the
trans isomer,in which the large substituents are farther apart,is more stable than the

cis isomer,in which the large substituents are closer together.
sp2CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3sp2sp2sp2sp2sp2sp2Section 4.11Addition of Hydrogen 
¥ The Relative Stabilities of Alkenes173CCRRRRCCRRRHCCRHRHCCRHHHrelative stabilities of alkyl-substituted alkenesmost stableleast stableCH3CCHCH
3CH3H  26.9 kcal/molCH2CCH2CH3CH3Potential energyH  28.5 kcal/molCH3CHCHCH
2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3H  30.3 kcal/molCH3most stableleast stableFigure 4.7
The relative energy levels(stabilities) of three alkenes that
can be catalytically hydrogenated
to 2-methylbutane.CCH3CHHCH
3H2Pd/CCH3CH2CH2CH3CCH3CCH3HHH2Pd/CCH3CH2CH2CH3trans-2-butenecis-2-buteneheat of hydrogenationkcal/molkJ/mol11512027.628.627.628.6HThe fewer hydrogens bonded to the 
carbons of an alkene, the more stable

itis.
sp2Alkyl substituents stabilize both alkenesandcarbocations.Platinum and palladium are expen-
sive metals,so the accidental finding

by Paul Sabatier 1854Ð1941)
thatnickel,a much cheaper metal,can

catalyze hydrogenation reactions

made hydrogenation a feasible 

large-scale industrial process. The

conversion of plant oils to margarine

is one such hydrogenation reaction.

Sabatier was born in France and 

was a professor at the University of

Toulouse. He shared the 1912 Nobel

Prize in chemistry with Victor

Grignard (p. 468).
BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 173
When the large substituents are on the same side of the molecule,their electron
clouds can interfere with each other,causing strain in the molecule and making it less

stable. You saw in Section2.11that this kind of strain is called 
steric strain.
When thelarge substituents are on opposite sides of the molecule,their electron clouds cannot

interact,and the molecule has less stericstrain.
The heat of hydrogenation of 
cis-2-butene,in which the two alkyl substituents are
on the same sideof the double bond,is similar to that of 2-methylpropene,in which
the two alkyl substituents are on the 
same carbon
. The three dialkyl-substituted
alkenes are all 
lessstable than a trialkyl-substituted alkene and are all 
more
stable thana monoalkyl-substituted alkene.
PROBLEM 29Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing stability:
trans
-3-hexene,
cis-3-hexene,1-hexene,
cis-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-3-hexene
4.12Reactions and SynthesisThis chapter has been concerned with the reactions of alkenes. You have seen why
alkenes react,the kinds of reagents with which they react,the mechanisms by which

the reactions occur,and the products that are formed. It is important to remember that

when you are studying reactions,you are simultaneously studying synthesis. When

you learn that compound A reacts with a certain reagent to form compound B,you are

learning not only about the reactivity of A,but also about one way that compound B

can be synthesized.For example,you have seen that alkenes can add many different reagents and that,as a
result of adding these reagents,compounds such as alkyl halides,vicinal dihalides,

halohydrins,alcohols,ethers,and alkanes are synthesized.
Although you have seen how alkenes react and have learned about the kinds of
compounds that are synthesized when alkenes undergo reactions,you have not yet

seen how alkenes are synthesized. Reactions of alkenes involve the 
additionof atoms(or groups of atoms) to the two carbons of the double bond. Reactions that lead to

the synthesis of alkenes are exactly the opposite
Ñthey involve the 
eliminationofatoms (or groups of atoms) from two adjacent carbons.
sp3sp2ABCCH3CHHalkyl substituentsare transCH3CCH3CHH3Calkyl substituentsare on the same sp2 carbonHCCH3CCH
3Halkyl substituentsare cisHrelative stabilities of dialkyl-substituted alkenes174CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenes3-D Molecule:cis-2-Butene3-D Molecule:trans-2-ButeneCCHHHHHHCHCHcis-2-buteneCCHHHCHHHHCHtrans-2-butenethe trans isomer does not have steric strainthe cis isomer has steric strainBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 174
Section 4.12Reactions and Synthesis
175You will learn how alkenes are synthesized when you study compounds that undergo
elimination reactions. The various reactions that result in the synthesis of alkenes are

listed in AppendixIV.
PROBLEM 30SOLVED
Starting with an alkene,indicate how each of the following compounds can be synthesized:
a.b.c.
SOLUTIONa.The only alkene that can be used for this synthesis is cyclohexene. To get the desired
substituents on the ring,cyclohexene must react with in an aqueous solution so that

water will be the nucleophile.
b.The alkene that should be used here is 1-methylcyclohexene. To get the substituents in
the desired locations,the electrophile in the reaction must be a bromine radical. There-

fore,the reagents required to react with 1-methylcyclohexene are HBr and a peroxide.
c.In order to synthesize an alkane from an alkene,the alkene must undergo catalytic hy-
drogenation. Several alkenes could be used for this synthesis.
PROBLEM 31Why should 3-methylcyclohexene not be used as the starting material in Problem 30b?
PROBLEM 32Starting with an alkene,indicate how each of the following compounds can be synthesized:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
OCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3OCH3CH2CHCHCH3BrBrCH3BrCH2OHCH3CHOCH3CH3H2Pd/CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2ororor
HBrperoxideCH3CH3BrCl2H2OClOHCl2CH3CH3BrClOHCCYZYZCCreaction of an alkenean addition reactionsynthesis of an alkenean elimination reactionBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 175
176CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesSummaryAlkenes
undergo 
electrophilic addition reactions
. Each re-action starts with the addition of an electrophile to one of thecarbons and concludes with the addition of a nucleophile
to the other carbon. In all electrophilic addition reactions,

the electrophile
adds to the carbon bonded to the greater
number of hydrogens. 
MarkovnikovÕs rule
states that thehydrogen adds to the carbon of the alkene bonded to the

greater number of hydrogens. While all addition reactions

add the electrophile to the carbon bonded to the greater

number of hydrogens,they all do not follow Markovnikov
Õsrule,because hydrogen is not always the electrophile.

HydroborationÐoxidation
and the addition of HBrin the
presence of a peroxide
are anti-Markovnikov additions
.The addition of hydrogen halides and the acid-catalyzedaddition of water and alcohols form 
carbocation interme-diates. Hyperconjugation
causes tertiary carbocationstobe more stable than secondary carbocations,which are
more stable than primary carbocations. A carbocation
will rearrange if it becomes more stable as a result of the
rearrangement. Carbocation rearrangements
occur by
1,2-hydride shifts
,1,2-methyl shifts
,and 
ring expansion.HBr in the presence of a peroxide forms a 
radicalintermediate. Radical intermediates do not rearrange.
HydroborationÐoxidation
is a concerted reaction
anddoes not form an intermediate.Oxymercuration
,alkoxymercuration
,and the addition
of and form 
cyclic intermediates. Oxymercurationand alkoxymercuration are followed by a reduction reac-

tion. Reductionincreases the number of CH bonds or
decreases the number of CO,CN,or CX bonds

(where X denotes a halogen). Hydroboration
is followed
by an oxidation reaction. Oxidationdecreases the numberof CH bonds or increases the number of CO,CN,

or CX bonds (where,again,X denotes a halogen).
Cl2Br2sp2sp2sp2sp2sp2The Hammond postulatestates that a transitionstateis more similar in structure to the species to which it
is more similar in energy. Thus,the more stable product

will have the more stable transition state and will lead to

the major product of the reaction. Regioselectivity
is thepreferential formation of one 
constitutional isomerover
another.
In heterolytic bond cleavage
,a bond breaks such that
both electrons in the bond stay with one of the atoms; in

homolytic bond cleavage
,a bond breaks such that each of
the atoms retains one of the bonding electrons. An alkyl

peroxide is a 
radical initiatorbecause it creates radicals.Radical addition reactions
are chain reactions
withinitiation,propagation
,and 
termination steps
. Radicalsare stabilized by electron-donating alkyl groups. Thus,a

tertiary alkyl radical
is more stable than a secondaryalkyl radical
,which is more stable than a 
primary alkyl
radical. A peroxide
reverses the order of addition of H and
Br because it causes instead of to be the elec-

trophile. The peroxide 
effectis observed only for the addi-
tion of HBr.
The addition of to a reaction is called 
hydrogena-
tion. The heat of hydrogenation
is the heat released in a
hydrogenation reaction. The 
greater
the stabilityof a com-pound,the 
loweris its energy
and the smalleris its heat ofhydrogenation
. The more alkyl substituents bonded to the
carbons of an alkene,the greater is its stability. Hence,
carbocations,alkyl radicals,and alkenes are all stabilized

by alkyl substituents
. Trans alkenes
are more stable thancis alkenes
because of steric strain.Electrophilic addition reactions of alkenes lead to the
synthesisof alkyl halides
,vicinal dihalides,halohydrins
,alcohols,ethers,and 
alkanes.sp2H2H,Br,Summary of ReactionsAs you review the reactions of alkenes,keep in mind the feature that is common to all of them:The first step of each reaction i
s the ad-dition of an electrophile to the carbon of the alkene that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens.
1.Electrophilic addition reactions
a.Addition of hydrogen halides (is the electrophile; Section4.1)
b.Addition of hydrogen bromide in the presence of a peroxide (is the electrophile; Section4.10)
RCHCH
2RCH2CH2BrHBrperoxideBrRCHCH
2RCHCH3HXXHX  HF, HCl, HBr, HIHsp2BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 176
Key Terms
177c.Addition of halogen (is the electrophile; Section4.7)
d.Acid-catalyzed addition of water and alcohols (is the electrophile; Section4.5)
e.Addition of water and alcohols:oxymercuration
Ðreduction and alkoxymercuration
Ðreduction (Hg is the electrophile and is
replaced by H in the second step; Section4.8)
f.HydroborationÐoxidation (B is the electrophile and is replaced in the second step by OH; Section4.9)
2.Addition of hydrogen (is the electrophile; Section4.11)
RCHCH
2H2RCH2CH3Pd/C, Pt/C, or NiHRCHCH
2RCH2CH2OH1. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2, H2ORCHCH
2RCHCH31. Hg(OAc)2, H2O,THF2. NaBH4OHRCHCH
21. Hg(O2CCF3)2, CH3OH2. NaBH4RCHCH3OCH3RCHCH
2RCHCH3H2OOHRCHCH
2RCHCH3CH3OHHOCH3HHRCHCH
2RCHCH2ClCl2CH2Cl2CH2Cl2ClRCHCH
2RCHCH2BrBr2BrH2ORCHCH
2RCHCH2BrBr2OHBr or ClKey Terms
acid-catalyzed reaction (p. 152)alkoxymercuration
Ðreduction (p. 162)carbene (p. 167)
carbocation rearrangement (p. 155)
catalyst (p. 152)
catalytic hydrogenation (p. 171)
concerted reaction (p. 164)
constitutional isomers (p. 148)
dimer (p. 164)
electrophilic addition reaction (p. 141)
free radical (p. 168)
halohydrin (p. 159)
Hammond postulate (p. 145)
heat of hydrogenation (p. 172)
heterogeneous catalyst (p. 171)
heterolysis (p. 168)heterolytic bond cleavage (p. 168)
homolysis (p. 168)
homolytic bond cleavage (p. 168)

hydration (p. 151)
hydroborationÐoxidation (p. 163)hydrogenation (p. 171)
hyperconjugation (p. 144)
initiation step (p. 170)
Markovnikov
Õs rule (p. 148)mechanism of the reaction (p. 142)
1,2-hydride shift (p. 155)
1,2-methyl shift (p. 155)
oxymercurationÐreduction (p. 161)pericyclic reaction (p. 164)

peroxide effect (p. 170)

primary alkyl radical (p. 168)
primary carbocation (p. 143)propagation step (p. 170)
radical (p. 168)
radical addition reaction (p. 168)
radical chain reaction (p. 170)
radical inhibitor (p. 170)
radical initiator (p. 170)
reduction reaction (p. 162)
regioselective reaction (p. 148)

secondary alkyl radical (p. 168)

secondary carbocation (p. 143)
steric effects (p. 165)

steric hindrance (p. 165)
termination step (p. 170)
tertiary alkyl radical (p. 168)

tertiary carbocation (p. 143)BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 177
178CHAPTER 4R
eactions of AlkenesProblems
33.Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
34.Identify the electrophile and the nucleophile in each of the following reaction steps. Then draw curved arrows to illustrate
 thebond-making and bond-breaking processes.35.What will be the major product of the reaction of 2-methyl-2-butene with each of the following reagents?
a.HBrh.followed by 

b.i.

c.HIj.

d.k.

e.ICll.

f.m.followed by 

g.n.followed by 
36.Which of the following compounds is the most stable?
3,4-dimethyl-2-hexene; 2,3-dimethyl-2-hexene; 4,5-dimethyl-2-hexene
Which would you expect to have the largest heat of hydrogenation? Which would you expect to have the lowest heat of
hydrogenation?37.When 3-methyl-1-butene reacts with HBr,two alkyl halides are formed:2-bromo-3-methylbutane and 2-bromo-2-methylbutane.
Propose a mechanism that explains the formation of these products.
38.Problem 30 in Chapter3asked you to give the structures of all alkenes with molecular formula Use those structures to
answer the following questions:

a.Which of the compounds is the most stable?b.Which of the compounds is the least stable?
C6H12.NaBH
4Hg(O
2CCF3)2CH3OH,Br2excess NaCl
H2O2HOBH3THF,
H2PdBr2CH3OHBr2H2OHIperoxide
Br2CH2Cl2H2Otrace
 HClHBrperoxide
NaBH
4Hg(OAc)
2, H2Oa.b.CH3CHCH2c.CH3C+CH3CH3CH3CHCH3CH3OHBrClÐCH3C+OCH3CH3CH3HCH3CHCH2BrCH3CHCH3Cl+CHa.CH2CH3b.CH2CCH2CH3HBrHBrCH3c.CH2d.CH3CH2CCHHBrCH3CH2CH3HBrBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 178
Problems17939.Draw curved arrows to show the flow of electrons responsible for the conversion of reactants into products.
40.Give the reagents that would be required to carry out the following syntheses:
41.For each pair of bonds,which has the greater strength? Briefly explain why.
a.c.
b.d.
42.Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
43.Using any alkene and any other reagents,how would you prepare the following compounds?
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
44.There are two alkenes that react with HBr to give 1-bromo-1-methylcyclohexane.
a.Identify the alkenes.

b.Will both alkenes give the same product when they react with HBr/peroxide?

c.With HCl?

d.With HCl/peroxide?
CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3ClBrCH2CHCH3OHCH3CH2CH2CHCH3ClCH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3OHBrCH2BrHCla.Br2CH3OHb.H2Oc.d.H+H2Oe.HBrperoxideHBrf.Cl2H2Og.i.H+CH3OHj.HClperoxideh.Cl2CH2Cl2IBrBrBr
orCH3CH2CH2HorCH
3CHCH3HCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3orCH3ClCH
3BrorCH2CHCH
2CH2CH2CH2OHCH2CHCH3CH2CHCH3CH2CHCH2BrCH2CH2CH2BrCH2CHCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CHCH2BrOHOHBrBrOCH3a.b.CH3CCc.CH3CH2CH3BrÐCH3CH2ÐNH2OCH3COÐCH3CH3CH3COCH3OÐHCH3CCÐNH3BrCH3OÐOCH3BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 179
180CHAPTER 4R
eactions of Alkenes45.For each of the following pairs,indicate which member is the more stable:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.46.The second-order rate constant (in units of ) for acid-catalyzed hydration at 25 
¡C is given for each of the following
alkenes:
a.Calculate the relative rates of hydration of the alkenes.
b.Why does (
Z)-2-butene react faster than (
E)-2-butene?
c.Why does 2-methyl-2-butene react faster than (
Z)-2-butene?
d.Why does 2,3-dimethyl-2-butene react faster than 2-methyl-2-butene?
47.Which compound has the greater dipole moment?
a.c.
b.48.a.What five-carbon alkene will form the same product whether it reacts with HBr in the 
presence
of a peroxide or with HBr inthe absenceof a peroxide?b.Give three alkenes containing six carbon atoms that form the same product,whether they react with HBr in the 
presence
of aperoxide or with HBr in the absenceof a peroxide.49.Mark Onikoff was about to turn in the products he had obtained from the reaction of HI with 3,3,3-trifluoropropene when he
realized that the labels had fallen off his flasks. He didn
Õt know which label belonged to which flask. Another student in the next
lab told him that because the product obtained by following Markovnikov
Õs rule was 1,1,1-trifluoro-2-iodopropane,he should put
that label on the flask containing the most product and label the flask with the least product 1,1,1-trifluoro-3-iodopropane,th
e anti-Markovnikov product. Should Mark follow the student
Õs advice?50.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction (show all curved arrows):
b.Which step is the rate-determining step?
c.What is the electrophile in the first step?

d.What is the nucleophile in the first step?

e.What is the electrophile in the second step?

f.What is the nucleophile in the second step?
CH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CHCH3CH3OHHOCH3orClHHHCCClHHCH3CCorClHCH3HCCClHHCH3CCorHHHClCCClHHClCCCH24.95 x 1088.32 x 1083.51 x 1082.15 x 1043.42 x 104H3CHCH3CH3CCH3CH3CCH3CHCH3CH3CCH3CHHCH3CCH3CHCH3HCCM1 s1CH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2orCH3CHCHCH3orClCH3CHCH2CH2ClCH3CHCH3CH3CHCH2ClorCH3orCH3CH3CCH2CH3CHCH2CH3orCH3CH3CH3CCHCH
2CH3CH3CHorCH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CCH3CH3CHCH2CH3orCH3BRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 180
Problems18151.a.What product is obtained from the reaction of HCl with 1-butene? With 2-butene?
b.Which of the two reactions has the greater free energy of activation?

c.Which of the two alkenes reacts more rapidly with HCl?

d.Which compound reacts more rapidly with HCl,(
Z)-2-butene or (
E)-2-butene?
52.a.How many alkenes could you treat with in order to prepare methylcyclopentane?
b.Which of the alkenes is the most stable?

c.Which of the alkenes has the smallest heat of hydrogenation?
53.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
b.Is the initially formed carbocation primary,secondary,or tertiary?
c.Is the rearranged carbocation primary,secondary,or tertiary?

d.Why does the rearrangement occur?
54.When the following compound is hydrated in the presence of acid,the unreacted alkene is found to have retained the deuterium
atoms:What does the preceding statement tell you about the mechanism of hydration?55.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.
b.c.56.a.Dichlorocarbene can be generated by heating chloroform with Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
b.Dichlorocarbene can also be generated by heating sodium trichloroacetate. Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
Cl2Csodium trichloroacetateCO2Na ClCl3CCO NaOHOdichlorocarbenechloroformH2OCHCl3Cl2CClHO.CCl3HCCl3peroxideCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2H3CNNCH3CH2CNN
H2OCH3HOCH3CH2H3CCH
H2SO4CHCD2CH2CH3CH3BrCH3CHBrCH3CH3BrH2PtBRUI04-141_181r4  20-03-2003  3:31 PM  Page 181
Compounds thathave the same
molecular formula but are not

identical are called isomers.Isomers fall into two main classes:

constitutional isomers
and stereo-
isomers
. Constitutional isomersdiffer
in the way their atoms are connected

(Section2.0). For example,ethanol and

dimethyl ether are constitutional isomers

because they have the same molecular formula,
but the atoms in each compound are connected differently. The oxygen in
ethanol is bonded to a carbon and to a hydrogen,whereas the oxygen in dimethyl ether

is bonded to two carbons.
Unlike the atoms in constitutional isomers,the atoms in stereoisomers are con-
nected in the same way. 
Stereoisomers
(also called 
configurational isomers
) differ
in the way their atoms are arranged in space. Stereoisomers are different compounds

that do not readily interconvert. Therefore,they can be separated. There are two

kinds of stereoisomers:cisÐtrans isomersand isomers that contain chirality (ky-RAL-i-tee) centers.
C2H6O,182StereochemistryThe Arrangement of Atoms in Space; The Stereochemistry of Addition Reactionsnonsuperimposablemirror images
CH3CH2OHand
ethanolconstitutional isomersCH3OCH3dimethyl etherCH3CCH3OandacetoneCH3CH2CHpropionaldehydeOCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3andpentaneCH3CHCH2CH3isopentaneCH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH3Cland1-chlorobutaneCH3CH2CHCH32-chlorobutane5BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 182
Section 5.1CisÐTrans Isomers
183Movie:IsomerismPROBLEM 1a.Draw three constitutional isomers with molecular formula 
b.How many constitutional isomers can you draw for 
5.1CisÐTrans Isomers
CisÐtrans isomers (also called geometric isomers) result from restricted rotation
(Section3.4). Restricted rotation can be caused either by a double bond or by a cyclic

structure. As a result of the restricted rotation about a carbonÐcarbon double bond,an

alkene such as 2-pentene can exist as cis and trans isomers. The 
cis isomerhas the hy-drogens on the 
same sideof the double bond,whereas the 
trans isomerhas thehydrogens on opposite sidesof the double bond.Cycliccompounds can also have cis and trans isomers (Section2.14). The cis iso-
mer has the hydrogens on the same side of the ring,whereas the trans isomer has the

hydrogens on opposite sides of the ring.PROBLEM 2Draw the cis and trans isomers for the following compounds:
a.1-ethyl-3-methylcyclobutanec.1-bromo-4-chlorocyclohexane
b.2-methyl-3-heptened.1,3-dibromocyclobutane
HHH3CCH3cis-1,4-dimethylcyclohexaneHCH3H3CHtrans-1,4-dimethylcyclohexanecis-1-bromo-3-chlorocyclobutaneHBrClHtrans-1-bromo-3-chlorocyclobutaneHHClBrC4H10O?C3H8O.isomersconstitutional isomersstereoisomersisomers that containchirality centerscisÐtransisomers3-D Molecules:cis-2-Pentene; trans-2-Pentenecis-2-pentenetrans-2-pentenecis-2-penteneCCH3CHHCH2CH3trans-2-penteneCCH3CHHCH2CH3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 183
an asymmetric carbon184CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry5.2ChiralityWhy canÕt you put your right shoe on your left foot? Why can
Õt you put your rightglove on your left hand? It is because hands,feet,gloves,and shoes have right-handed

and left-handed forms. An object with a right-handed and a left-handed form is said to

be chiral(ky-ral). 
ÒChiralÓcomes from the Greek word 
cheir
,which means 
Òhand.ÓNotice that chirality is a property of an entire object.A chiral object has a nonsuperimposable mirror image
. In other words,its mirror
image is not the same as itself. A hand is chiral because if you look at your left hand in

a mirror,you do not see your left hand; you see your right hand (Figure5.1). In con-

trast,a chair is not chiral
Ñit looks the same in the mirror. Objects that are not chiral
are said to be 
achiral. An achiral object has a 
superimposable mirror image
. Someother achiral objects would be a table,a fork,and a glass.
PROBLEM 3a.Name five capital letters that are chiral.b.Name five capital letters that are achiral.
A molecule with one asymmetric carbonis chiral.left handright handFigure 5.1
Using a mirror to test for chirality. A
chiral object is not the same as its
mirror imageÑthey arenonsuperimposable. An achiral
object is the same as its mirror
imageÑthey are superimposable.5.3Asymmetric Carbons, Chirality Centers, and Stereocenters
Not only can objects be chiral,molecules can be chiral,too. The feature that most
often is the cause of chirality in a molecule is an asymmetric carbon
. (Other featuresthat cause chirality are relatively uncommon and are beyond the scope of this book.

You can,however,see one of these in Problem 88.)
An asymmetric carbonis a carbon atom that is bonded to four different groups. The
asymmetric carbon in each of the following compounds is indicated by an asterisk. For

example,the starred carbon in 4-octanol is an asymmetric carbon because it is bonded to

four different groups (H,OH,and ). Notice that the

difference in the groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon is not necessarily right next to

the asymmetric carbon. For example,the propyl and butyl groups are different even

though the point at which they differ is somewhat removed from the asymmetric carbon.

The starred carbon in 2,4-dimethylhexane is an asymmetric carbon because it is bonded

to four different groups
Ñmethyl,ethyl,isobutyl,and hydrogen.
4-octanolCH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3OH*2-bromobutaneCH3CHCH2CH3Br*2,4-dimethylhexaneCH3CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH3*CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3,BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 184
Section 5.4Isomers with One Asymmetric Carbon
185Tutorial:
Identification of asymmetric
carbon atomsNotice that the only carbons that can be asymmetric carbons are hybridized car-
bons; and sphybridized carbons cannot be asymmetric carbons because they can-
not have four groups attached to them.
An asymmetric carbon is also known as a 
chirality center
. We will see that
atoms other than carbon,such as nitrogen andphosphorus,can be chirality

centersÑwhen they are bonded to four different atoms or groups (Section5.17). In
other words,an asymmetric carbon is just one kind of chirality center. A chirality

center also belongs to a broader group known as 
stereocenters
. Stereocenters will bedefined in Section5.5.
PROBLEM 4Which of the following compounds have asymmetric carbons?
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 5SOLVED
Tetracycline is called a broad-spectrum antibiotic because it is active against a wide variety
of bacteria. How many asymmetric carbons does tetracycline have?
SOLUTIONFirst,locate all the hybridized carbons in tetracycline. (They are num-
bered in red.) Only hybridized carbons can be asymmetric carbons,because an asym-

metric carbon must have four different groups attached to it. Tetracycline has nine 

hybridized carbons. Four of them (#1,#2,#5,and #8) are not asymmetric carbons because

they are not bonded to four different groups. Tetracycline,therefore,has five asymmetric

carbons.5.4Isomers with One Asymmetric CarbonA compoundwith one asymmetric carbon,such as 2-bromobutane,can exist as two
different stereoisomers. The two isomers are analogous to a left and a right hand.

Imagine a mirror between the two isomers; notice how they are mirror images of each

other. The two stereoisomers are nonsuperimposable mirror images
Ñthey are differ-
ent molecules.H3CHCH3H3CNOHtetracycline213865497OHOOOOHOHOHCNH2sp3sp3sp3CHCHCH3NH2CH2CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3BrCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3BrCH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH2OHCH3CH2CHCH3Clsp2sp3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 185
186CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryA chiral molecule has a nonsuperimpos-able mirror image.
An achiral molecule has a superimpos-able mirror image.
Take a break and convince yourself that the two 2-bromobutane isomers are not iden-
tical,by building ball-and-stick models using four different-colored balls to represent the

four different groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon. Try to superimpose them.
Nonsuperimposable mirror-image molecules are called 
enantiomers(from the
Greek enantion,which means 
ÒoppositeÓ). The two stereoisomers of 2-bromobu-
tane are enantiomers. A molecule that has a nonsuperimposable mirror image,like

an object that has a nonsuperimposable mirror image,is chiral.Each of the

enantiomers is chiral. A molecule that has a superimposable mirror image,like an

object that has a superimposable mirror image,is achiral. To see that the achiral

moleule is superimposable on its mirror image (i.e.,they are identical molecules),

mentally rotate the achiral molecule clockwise. Notice that chirality is a property of
the entire molecule.PROBLEM 6Which of the compounds in Problem4 can exist as enantiomers?
5.5Drawing EnantiomersChemists draw enantiomers using either 
perspective formulas
or Fischer projections
.This book has been written in a way that allows you to use either perspective formulas or
Fischer projections. Most chemists use perspective formulas. If you choose to use perspec-

tive formulas,you can ignore all the Fischer projections in the book.
Perspective formulas
show two of the bonds to the asymmetric carbon in the plane
of the paper,one bond as a solid wedge protruding out of the paper,and the fourth

bond as a hatched wedge extending behind the paper. You can draw the first enan-

tiomer by putting the four groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon in any order. Draw

the second enantiomer by drawing the mirror image of the firstenantiomer.
an achiralmoleculea chiralmoleculesuperimposablemirror imagenonsuperimposablemirror imageenantiomersidentical molecules
CHBrCH3CH3CH2CHBrH3CCH2CH3CBrH3CH3CCH2CH3CCH3BrCH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3BrBrH2-bromobutanethe two isomers of 2-bromobutaneenantiomersmirrorBrH*CCMovie:Nonsuperimposable mirror
imageBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 186
A shortcutÑcalled a Fischer projection
Ñfor showing the three-dimensional
arrangement of groups bonded to an asymmetric carbon was devised in the late 1800s

by Emil Fischer. A Fischer projecton represents an asymmetric carbon as the point of

intersection of two perpendicular lines; horizontal lines represent the bonds that pro-

ject out of the plane of the paper toward the viewer,and vertical lines represent the

bonds that extend back from the plane of the paper away from the viewer. The carbon

chain always is drawn vertically with C-1 at the top of the chain.
To draw enantiomers using a Fischer projection,draw the first enantiomer by ar-
ranging the four atoms or groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon in any order. Draw

the second enantiomer by interchanging two of the atoms or groups. It does not matter

which two you interchange. (Make models to convince yourself that this is true.) It is

best to interchange the groups on the two horizontal bonds because the enantiomers

then look like mirror images on paper.
Note that interchanging two atoms or groups gives you the enantiomer
Ñwhetheryou are drawing perspective formulas or Fischer projections. Interchanging two atoms

or groups a second time,brings you back to the original molecule.
A stereocenter
(or stereogenic center) is an atom at which the interchange of two
groups produces a stereoisomer. Therefore,both 
asymmetric carbons
Ñwhere the in-terchange of two groups produces an enantiomer and the carbons where the inter-

change of two groups converts a cis isomer to a trans isomer (or a 
Zisomer to an Eisomer)Ñare stereocenters.PROBLEM 7Draw enantiomers for each of the following compounds using:
a.perspective formulas
b.Fischer projections
Br1.CH3CHCH2OHCH32.CH3OH3.ClCH2CH2CHCH2CH3CH3CHCHCH3HHBrCH3CHCH3CH2CCHHCH3CH2CH3ClBra stereocentera stereocentera stereocenterBrCH2CH3HFischer projections of the enantiomers of 2-bromobutaneasymmetric carbonCH3CH3CH2CH3HBr
perspective formulas of the enantiomers of 2-bromobutaneCHBrCH3CH2CH3CH3CBrHCH3CH2Section 5.5Drawing Enantiomers
187The solid wedges represent bonds that
point out of the plane of the paper to-
ward the viewer.
The hatched wedges represent bonds
that point back from the plane of the

paper away from the viewer.
Make certain when you draw a perspec-tive formula that the two bonds in the
plane of the paper are adjacent to one

another; neither the solid wedge nor
the hatched wedge should be drawn
between them.In a Fischer projection horizontal lines
project out of the plane of the paper

toward the viewer and vertical lines ex-

tend back from the plane of the paper

away from the viewer.
Emil Fischer (1852Ð1919)was bornin a village near Cologne,Germany.

He became a chemist against the

wishes of his father,a successful mer-

chant,who wanted him to enter the

family business. He was a professor

of chemistry at the Universities of

Erlangen,urg,and Berlin. In

1902 he received the Nobel Prize in

chemistry for his work on sugars.

During World War I,he organized

German chemical production. Two of

his three sons died in that war.
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 187
188CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryRobert Sidney Cahn (1899Ð1981),was born in England and received an

M.A. from Cambridge University and

a doctorate in natural philosophy in

France. He edited the 
Journal of theChemical Society(London).Sir Christopher Ingold (1893Ð1970)was born in Ilford,England,and was

knighted by Queen Elizabeth II. He
was a professor of chemistry at Leeds

University (1924Ð1930) and at

University College,London

(1930Ð1970).Vladimir Prelog (1906Ð1998)
wasborn in Sarajevo,Bosnia. In 1929 he

received a Dr. Ing. degree from the

Institute of Technology in Prague,

Czechoslovakia. He taught at the

University of Zagreb from 1935 until

1941,when he fled to Switzerland

just ahead of the invading German

army. He was a professor at the

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology

(ETH). For his work that contributed

to an understanding of how living or-

ganisms carry out chemical reac-

tions,he shared the 1975 Nobel Prize

in chemistry with John Cornforth

(page231).
5.6Naming Enantiomers:The R,SSystem of Nomenclature
We need a way to name the individual stereoisomers of a compound such as 2-bromo-
butane so that we know which stereoisomer we are talking about. In other words,we

need a system of nomenclature that indicates the 
configuration
(arrangement) of theatoms or groups about the asymmetric carbon. Chemists use the letters Rand Sto in-
dicate the configuration about an asymmetric carbon. For any pair of enantiomers with

one asymmetric carbon,one will have the 
Rconfiguration
and the other will have the
Sconfiguration
. The R,Ssystem was devised by Cahn,Ingold,and Prelog.
LetÕs first look at how we can determine the configuration of a compound if we
have a three-dimensional model of the compound.
1.Rank the groups (or atoms) bonded to the asymmetric carbon in order of
priority. The atomic numbers of the atoms directly attached to the asymmetric carbon
determine the relative priorities. The higher the atomic number,the higher the priority.

(This should remind you of the way relative priorities are determined for the 
E,Zsystem of nomenclature because the system of priorities was originally devised for the

R,Ssystem of nomenclature and was later borrowed for the 
E,Zsystem. You may want
to revisit Section3.5to review how relative priorities are determined before you

proceed with the R,Ssystem.2.Orient the molecule so that the group (or atom) with the lowest priority (4)is di-
rected away from you
. Then draw an imaginary arrow from the group (or atom) with the
highest priority (1)to the group (or atom) with the next highest priority (2)
. If the arrow
points clockwise,the asymmetric carbon has the 
Rconfiguration (
Ris for rectus
,which
is Latin for 
ÒrightÓ). If the arrow points counterclockwise,the asymmetric carbon has
the Sconfiguration (
Sis for sinister,which is Latin for 
ÒleftÓ).1243clockwise = R configuration1243this has the highest prioritythis has the lowest priorityThe molecule is oriented so the group
with the lowest priority points away
from the viewer. If an arrow drawn from

the highest priority group to the next

highest priority group points clockwise,

the molecule has the Rconfiguration.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 188
Section 5.6Naming Enantiomers: The 
R,SSystem of Nomenclature189If you forget which is which,imagine driving a car and turning the steering wheel
clockwise to make a right turn or counterclockwise to make aleft turn.
If you are able to easily visualize spatial relationships,the above two rules are all
you need to determine whether the asymmetric carbon of a molecule written on a two-

dimensional piece of paper has the Ror the Sconfiguration. Just mentally rotate the
molecule so that the group (or atom) with the lowest priority (4)is directed away from

you,then draw an imaginary arrow from the group (or atom) with the highest priority

to the group (or atom) with the next highest priority.
If you have trouble visualizing spatial relationships and you don
Õt have access to a
model,the following will allow you to determine the configuration about an asymmet-

ric carbon without having to mentally rotate the molecule.
First,let
Õs look at how you can determine the configuration of a compound drawn
as a perspective formula. As an example,we will determine which of the enantiomers

of 2-bromobutane has the 
Rconfiguration and which has the 
Sconfiguration.
1.Rank the groups (or atoms) that are bonded to the asymmetric carbon in order of
priority. In the following pair of enantiomers,bromine has the highest priority (1),the

ethyl group has the second highest priority (2),the methyl group is next (3),and hy-

drogen has the lowest priority (4). (Revisit Section3.5if you don
Õt understand how
these priorities are assigned.)2.If the group (or atom) with the lowest priority is bonded by a hatched wedge,
draw an arrow from the group (or atom) with the highest priority (1)to the group (or

atom) with the second highest priority (2). If the arrow points clockwise,the com-

pound has the Rconfiguration,and if it points counterclockwise,the compound has
the Sconfiguration.
3.If the group with the lowest priority (4)is NOT bonded by a hatched wedge,
then switch two groups so group 4 is bonded by a hatched wedge. Then proceed as in

step #2 (above):Draw an arrow from the group (or atom) with the highest priority

(1)to the group (or atom) with the second highest priority (2). Because you have

switched two groups,you are now determining the configuration of the enantiomer of

the original molecule. So if the arrow points clockwise,the enantiomer (with the

switched groups) has the 
Rconfiguration,which means the original molecule has the
Sconfiguration. In contrast,if the arrow points counterclockwise,the enantiomer
(with the switched groups) has the 
Sconfiguration,which means the original molecule
has the Rconfiguration.
(S)-2-bromobutane(
R)-2-bromobutaneCCH3CH2BrHCH3CHBrCH2CH3CH31122334411223344CCH3CH2BrHCH3CHBrCH2CH3CH3the enantiomers of 2-bromobutaneCCH3CH2BrHCH3CHBrCH2CH3CH3Clockwise specifies Rif the lowest prior-ity substituent is on a hatched wedge.left turnright turn3-D Molecules:(R)-2-Bromobutane; (S)-2-BromobutaneBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 189
190CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry4.In drawing the arrow from group 1 to group 2,you can draw past the group with the
lowest priority (4),but never draw past the group with the next lowest priority (3).
Now let
Õs see how to determine the configuration of a compound drawn as a Fischer
projection.1.Rank the groups (or atoms) that are bonded to the asymmetric carbon in order of
priority.
2.Draw an arrow from the group (or atom) with the highest priority (1)to the group
(or atom) with the next highest priority (2). If the arrow points clockwise,the enan-

tiomer has the Rconfiguration; if it points counterclockwise,the enantiomer has the 
Sconfiguration,
provided that the group with the lowest priority (4)is on a vertical bond
.3.If the group (or atom) with the lowest priority is on a 
horizontalbond,the answer
you get from the direction of the arrow will be the opposite of the correct answer. For

example,if the arrow points clockwise,suggesting that the asymmetric carbon has the

Rconfiguration,it actually has the 
Sconfiguration; if the arrow points counterclock-
wise,suggesting that the asymmetric carbon has the 
Sconfiguration,it actually has the
Rconfiguration. In the following example,the group with the lowest priority is on a
horizontal bond,so clockwise signifies the 
Sconfiguration,not the 
Rconfiguration.
4.In drawing the arrow from group 1 to group 2,you can draw past the group (or
atom) with the lowest priority (4),but never draw past the group (or atom) with the

next lowest priority (3).
HCH3COHOHO31(S)-lactic acidCH3HCOHOHO34412(R)-lactic acid2HOHCH3CH2CH33321(S)-2-butanolHOHCH3CH2CH32441(R)-2-butanolCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3ClH124(R)-3-chlorohexaneCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3ClH1324(S)-3-chlorohexane3(R)-1-bromo-3-pentanolCCH3CH2OHHCH2CH2Br1324CCH3CH2OHHCH2CH2Br132422143341         CH3 and Hwhat is its configuration?switch this molecule has the R configuration;therefore, it had the S configuration before the groups were switched HOCH2CH3CH3HCCHOCH2CH3HCH3Clockwise specifies Rif the lowest prior-ity substituent is on a vertical bond.Clockwise specifies Sif the lowest priori-ty substituent is on a horizontal bond.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 190
Section 5.6Naming Enantiomers: The 
R,SSystem of Nomenclature191It is easy to tell whether two molecules are enantiomers (nonsuperimposable) or
identical molecules (superimposable) if you have molecular models of the molecules
Ñjust see whether the models superimpose. If,however,you are working with structures

on a two-dimensional piece of paper,the easiest way to determine whether two mole-

cules are enantiomers or identical molecules is by determining their configurations. If

one has the Rconfiguration and the other has the 
Sconfiguration,they are enan-
tiomers. If they both have the 
Rconfiguration or both have the 
Sconfiguration,they
are identical molecules.When comparing two Fischer projections to see if they are the same or different,
never rotate one 90¡or turn one over,because this is a quick way to get a wrong an-

swer. A Fischer projection can be rotated 180¡in the plane of the paper,but this is the

only way to move it without risking an incorrect answer
.PROBLEM 8Indicate whether each of the following structures has the 
Ror the Sconfiguration:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 9SOLVED
Do the following structures represent identical molecules or a pair of enantiomers?
a.b.
c.d.
SOLUTION TO 9a
The first structure shown in part (a)has the 
Sconfiguration,and the
second structure has the Rconfiguration. Because they have opposite configurations,the
structures represent a pair of enantiomers.PROBLEM 10Assign relative priorities to the following groups:
a.b.
c.d.CHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2BrClCH2CH2BrCH(CH3)2CH2OHCH3OHCHOHCH2CH2OHCH3CH2OHCH3CH2CH3andClHHCl
CH3CH2CH3CHCH2BrOHandCH3CHOHCH3CH2BrCCH3CH2BrClandCH2CH3CCH3CH2ClCH3CH2BrCHOCH3HandCH2CH2CH3CCH3CH2CH2OHCH3HClCCH3CH2CH2BrCH2CH2ClOHHOCCH3CH(CH3)2CH2CH3CH2BrBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 191
When light is filtered throughtwo polarized lenses at a 90¡angleto one other, no light is transmitted

through them.192CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPROBLEM 11Indicate whether each of the following structures has the 
Ror the Sconfiguration:
a.c.
b.d.
5.7Optical ActivityEnantiomers share many of the same properties
Ñthey have the same boiling points,
the same melting points,and the same solubilities. In fact,all the physical properties

of enantiomers are the same except those that stem from how groups bonded to the

asymmetric carbon are arranged in space. One of the properties that enantiomers do

not share is the way they interact with polarized light.
What is polarized light? Normal light consists of electromagnetic waves that oscil-
late in all directions. Plane-polarized light(or simply polarized light),in contrast,os-
cillates only in a single plane passing through the path of propagation. Polarized light

is produced by passing normal light through a polarizer such as a polarized lens or a
Nicol prism.You experience the effect of a polarized lens with polarized sunglasses. Polarized
sunglasses allow only light oscillating in a single plane to pass through them,so they

block reflections (glare) more effectively than nonpolarized sunglasses.
In 1815,the physicist Jean-Baptiste Biot discovered that certain naturally occurring
organic substances such as camphor and oil of turpentine are able to rotate the plane of

polarization. He noted that some compounds rotated the plane of polarization clock-

wise and others counterclockwise,while some did not rotate the plane of polarization

at all. He predicted that the ability to rotate the plane of polarization was attributable to

some asymmetry in the molecules. Van
Õt Hoff and Le Bel later determined that the
molecular asymmetry was associated with compounds having one or more asymmet-

ric carbons.When polarized light passes through a solution of achiral molecules,the light
emerges from the solution with its plane of polarization unchanged. 
An achiral com-
pound does not rotate the plane of polarization. It is optically inactive
.direction of light propagationpolarizernormallightlightsourceplane-polarizedlightlight waves oscillate
in a single planelight waves oscillate
in all directionsCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3HOH
CH2CH2CH3CH2OHCH3HBrCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2BrCH(CH3)2CH3Born in Scotland,William Nicol
(1768Ð1851)was a professor at the
University of Edinburgh. He devel-

oped the first prism that produced

plane-polarized light. He also devel-

oped methods to produce thin slices

of materials for use in microscopic

studies.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 192
Section 5.7Optical Activity
193However,when polarized light passes through a solution of a chiral compound,the
light emerges with its plane of polarization changed. Thus,
a chiral compound rotates
the plane of polarization
. A chiral compound will rotate the plane of polarization
clockwise or counterclockwise. If one enantiomer rotates the plane of polarization
clockwise,its mirror image will rotate the plane of polarization exactly the same

amount counterclockwise.A compound that rotates the plane of polarization is said to be 
optically active
. Inother words,chiral compounds are optically active and achiral compounds are

optically inactive
.If an optically active compound rotates the plane of polarization clockwise,it is
called dextrorotatory
,indicated by If an optically active compound rotates the
plane of polarization counterclockwise,it is called 
levorotatory
,indicated by 
Dextro
and levo
are Latin prefixes for 
Òto the rightÓand Òto the left,Órespectively.
Sometimes lowercase 
dand lare used instead of and 
Do not confuse and with 
Rand S. The and symbols indicate the di-
rection in which an optically active compound rotates the plane of polarization,where-

as Rand Sindicate the arrangement of the groups about an asymmetric carbon. Some
compounds with the Rconfiguration are and some are 
The degree to which an optically active compound rotates the plane of polarization
can be measured with an instrument called a polarimeter(Figure5.2). Because the
().()()()()()().()().().direction of light propagationpolarizernormallightlightsourceplane-polarizedlightplane-polarizedlightsample tubecontaining anachiral compoundthe plane of polarization
has not been rotateddirection of light propagationpolarizernormallightlightsourceplane-polarizedlightplane-polarizedlightsample tubecontaining achiral compoundthe plane of polarization
has been rotateddirection of light propagationpolarizernormallightlightsourceplane-polarizedlightplane-polarizedlightsample tubecontaining achiral compoundanalyzerviewer
Figure 5.2
Schematic of a polarimeter.
Joseph Achille Le Bel (1847Ð1930)
,a French chemist,inherited his fami-

lyÕs fortune,which enabled him to

establish his own laboratory. He and

vanÕt Hoff independently arrived at

the reason for the optical activity of

certain molecules. Although vanÕt

HoffÕs explanation was more precise,

both chemists are given credit for the

work.Some molecules with the Rconfigura-tion are and some molecules with

the Rconfiguration are 
().(),BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 193
194CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryamount of rotation will vary with the wavelength of the light used,the light source for
a polarimeter must produce monochromatic (single wavelength) light. Most polarime-

ters use light from a sodium arc (called the sodium D-line; wavelength). In

a polarimeter,monochromatic light passes through a polarizer and emerges as polar-

ized light. The polarized light then passes through an empty sample tube (or one filled

with an optically inactive solvent) and emerges with its plane of polarization un-

changed. The light then passes through an analyzer. The analyzer is a second polarizer

mounted on an eyepiece with a dial marked in degrees. When using a polarimeter,the

analyzer is rotated until the userÕs eye sees total darkness. At this point the analyzer is
at a right angle to the first polarizer,so no light passes through. This analyzer setting

corresponds to zero rotation.The sample to be measured is then placed in the sample tube. If the sample is opti-
cally active,it will rotate the plane of polarization. The analyzer will no longer block

all the light,so light reaches the user
Õs eye. The user then rotates the analyzer again
until no light passes through. The degree to which the analyzer is rotated can be read

from the dial and represents the difference between an optically inactive sample and

the optically active sample. This is called the 
observed rotation
it is measured indegrees. The observed rotation depends on the number of optically active molecules

the light encounters in the sample. This,in turn,depends on the concentration of the

sample and the length of the sample tube. The observed rotation also depends on the

temperature and the wavelength of the light source.
Each optically active compound has a characteristic specific rotation. The 
specific
rotation
is the number of degrees of rotation caused by a solution of 1.0g of the com-
pound per mL of solution in a sample tube 1.0dm long at a specified temperature and

wavelength. The specific rotation can be calculated from the observed rotation using

the following formula:
where is the specific rotation; 
Tis temperature in ¡C; is the wavelength of the in-
cident light (when the sodium D-line is used,is indicated as D); is the observed ro-

tation; lis the length of the sample tube in decimeters; and 
cis the concentration of thesample in grams per milliliter of solution.For example,one enantiomer of 2-methyl-1-butanol has been found to have a spe-
cific rotation of Because its mirror image rotates the plane of polarization the

same amount but in the opposite direction,the specific rotation of the other enan-

tiomer must be PROBLEM 12The observed rotation of 2.0g of a compound in 50mL of solution in a polarimeter tube
50-cm long is What is the specific rotation of the compound?
Knowing whether a chiral molecule has the 
Ror the Sconfiguration does not tell us
the direction the compound rotates the plane of polarization,because some com-

pounds with the 
Rconfiguration rotate the plane to the right and some rotate the
plane to the left We can tell by looking at the structure of a compound whether it

has the Ror the Sconfiguration,but the only way we can tell whether a compound is
().()13.4¡.CCH3CH2OHHHCH2CH3CH2CH3CCH2OHCH3(R)-2-methyl-1-butanol(
S)-2-methyl-1-butanol5.75[  ]20 C    5.75[  ]20 CDD5.75¡.5.75¡.all[a][  ]l  cT(a);589 nmMovie:Optical activityJacobus Hendricus van
Õt Hoff(1852Ð1911),a Dutch chemist,was a
professor of chemistry at the Univer-

sity of Amsterdam and later at the

University of Berlin. He received the

first Nobel Prize in chemistry (1901)

for his work on solutions.Born in France,
Jean-Baptiste Biot
(1774Ð1862)was imprisoned for tak-ing part in a street riot during the

French Revolution. He became a pro-

fessor of mathematics at the Univer-
sity of Beauvais and later a professor

of physics at the Coll‘ge de France.

He was awarded the Legion of Honor

by Louis XVIII. (Also see p.212.)
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 194
Section 5.8Optical Purity and Enantiomeric Excess
195dextrorotatory or levorotatory is to put the compound in a polarimeter. For ex-
ample,(
S)-lactic acid and (S)-sodium lactate have the same configuration,but
(S)-lactic acid is dextrorotatory whereas (
S)-sodium lactate is levorotatory. When we
know the direction an optically active compound rotates the plane of polarization,we

can incorporate or into its name.
PROBLEM 13a.Is (
R)-lactic acid dextrorotatory or levorotatory?
b.Is (
R)-sodium lactate dextrorotatory or levorotatory?
A mixture of equal amounts of two enantiomers
Ñsuch as (R)--lactic acid and
(S)--lactic acid
Ñis called a racemic mixture
or a racemate. Racemic mixturesdo not rotate the plane of polarized light. They are optically inactive because for

every molecule in a racemic mixture that rotates the plane of polarization in one di-

rection,there is a mirror-image molecule that rotates the plane in the opposite direc-

tion. As a result,the light emerges from a racemic mixture with its plane of

polarization unchanged. The symbol is used to specify a racemic mixture. Thus,
-2-bromobutane indicates a mixture of -2-bromobutane and an equal amount
of -2-bromobutane.
PROBLEM 14glutamate (MSG) is a flavor enhancer used in many foods. Some
people have an allergic reaction to MSG (headache,chest pains,and an overall feeling of

weakness). ÒFast food
Óoften contains substantial amounts of MSG,and it is widely used
in Chinese food as well. MSG has a specific rotation of 
a.What is the specific rotation of (
R)--monosodium glutamate?
b.What is the specific rotation of a racemic mixture of MSG?
5.8Optical Purity and Enantiomeric ExcessWhether a particular sample consists of a single enantiomer or a mixture of enantiomerscan be determined by its 
observed specific rotation
. For example,an 
enantiomericallypure
sampleÑmeaning only one enantiomer is present
Ñof (S)--2-bromobutane will
have an 
observed specific rotation
of because the 
specific rotation
of (
S)--
2-bromobutane is If,however,the sample of 2-bromobutane has an observed

specific rotation of 0
¡,we will know that the compound is a racemic mixture. If the ob-
served specific rotation is positive but less than we will know that we have a

mixture of enantiomers and the mixture contains more of the enantiomer with the Scon-figuration than the enantiomer with the 
Rconfiguration. From the observed specific ro-
tation,we can calculate the 
optical purity (op)of the mixture.optical purity
observed specific rotation
specific rotation of the pure enantiomer
23.1¡,23.1¡.()23.1¡()()COOCCH2CH2COONaHNH3(S)-()-monosodium glutamate24¡.()-()-Monosodium()()()()()()CHOCH3HHOHCOONaCOOHCCH3(S)-()-lactic acid(
S)-()-sodium lactate()()()()BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 195
196CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryFor example,if a sample of 2-bromobutane has an observed specific rotation of
its optical purity is 0.40. In other words,it is 40% optically pure
Ñ40% of the
mixture consists of an excess of a single enantiomer.
Because the observed specific rotation is positive,we know that the solution con-
tains excess (
S)--2-bromobutane. The 
enantiomeric excess (ee)tells us how much
excess (
S)--2-bromobutane is in the mixture. As long as the compound is chemi-
cally pure,enantiomeric excess and optical purity will be the same.
If the mixture has a 40% enantiomeric excess,40% of the mixture is excess 
Senan-tiomer and 60% is a racemic mixture. Half of the racemic mixture plus the amount of

excess 
Senantiomer equals the amount of the Senantiomer present in the mixture.Thus,70% of the mixture is the 
Senantiomer and 30% is the 
Renantiomer.
PROBLEM 15acid has a specific rotation of What would be the observed specific
rotation of each of the following mixtures?
a.25% acid and 75% acid
b.50% acid and 50% acid

c.75% acid and 25% acid
PROBLEM 16Naproxen,a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug,is the active ingredient in Aleve.
Naproxen has a specific rotation of in chloroform. One commercial preparation re-

sults in a mixture that is 97% optically pure.a.Does naproxen have the 
Ror the Sconfigurtion?
b.What percent of each enantiomer is obtained from the commercial preparation?
PROBLEM 17SOLVED
A solution prepared by mixing 10mL of a 0.10M solution of the 
Renantiomer and 30mL
of a 0.10M solution of the 
Senantiomer was found to have an observed specific rotation of
What is the specific rotation of each of the enantiomers?
SOLUTIONOne millimole (mmol) of the 
Renantiomer is mixed
with 3 mmol of the 
Senantiomer; 1mmol of the 
Renantiomer plus1mmol of the 
Senantiomer will form 2mmol of a racemic mixture. There will be 2mmol
of Senantiomer left over. Therefore,2mmol out of 4mmol is excess 
SenantiomerThe solution is 50% optically pure.The Senantiomer has a specific rotation of the 
Renantiomer has a specific rotation
of 9.6¡.9.6¡; 9.6¡ 0.50
4.8
¡ optical purity
0.50observed specific rotationspecific rotation of the pure enantiomer240.50.(30.0 mL0.10 M)(10.0 mL0.10 M)4.8
¡.66¡()-mandelic()-mandelic()-mandelic()-mandelic()-mandelic()-mandelic158¡.()-Mandelic126040enantiomeric excessexcess of a single enantiomerentire mixture   1004040100()()optical purity
9.2
¡23.1
¡0.40 or 40%
9.2¡,BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 196
Section 5.9Isomers with More than One Asymmetric Carbon
1975.9Isomers with More than
One Asymmetric CarbonMany organic compounds have more than one asymmetric carbon. The more asym-
metric carbons a compound has,the more stereoisomers are possible for the com-

pound. If we know how many asymmetric carbons a compound has,we can calculate

the maximum number of stereoisomers for that compound:
a compound can have a
maximum ofstereoisomers
(provided it doesn
Õt have any other stereocenters),
where
n equals the number of asymmetric carbons
. For example,3-chloro-2-butanol
has two asymmetric carbons. Therefore,it can have as many as four 

stereoisomers. The four stereoisomers are shown both as perspective formulas and as

Fischer projections.The four stereoisomers of 3-chloro-2-butanol consist of two pairs of enantiomers.
Stereoisomers 1and 2are nonsuperimposable mirror images. They,therefore,are
enantiomers. Stereoisomers 3and 4are also enantiomers. Stereoisomers 1and 3arenot identical,and they are not mirror images. Such stereoisomers are called diastere-

omers. Diastereomers
are stereoisomers that are not enantiomers. Numbers 
1and 4,2and 3,and 
2and 4are also diastereomers. (CisÐtrans isomers are also considered to be
diastereomers because they are stereoisomers that are not enantiomers.)
Enantiomers have identical physical properties (except for the way they interact
with polarized light) and identical chemical propertiesÑthey react at the same rate
with a given achiral reagent. Diastereomers have different physical properties (differ-

ent melting points,different boiling points,different solubilities,different specific ro-

tations,and so on) and different chemical properties
Ñthey react with the same achiral
reagent at different rates.
When Fischer projections are drawn for stereoisomers with two adjacent asymmet-
ric carbons (such as those for 3-chloro-2-butanol),the enantiomers with similar
Fisher projections of the stereoisomers of 3-chloro-2-butanolerythro enantiomersCH3CH3OH1ClHHCH3CH3H2HClHOthreo enantiomersCH3CH3OH3HClHCH3CH3H4ClHHOstereoisomers of 3-chloro-2-butanolerythro enantiomersperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of 3-chloro-2-butanol (staggered)12ClHClH34H3CHClHOHCH3CHOHCH3CCH3CCCH3HHHOClCCH3CCH3CHHOCH3Cthreo enantiomers3-chloro-2-butanolCH3CHCHCH3ClOH
**2242nDiastereomers are stereoisomers that
are not enantiomers.
3-D Molecules:(2S,3S)-3-Chloro-2-butanol;(2S,3S)-3-Chloro-2-butanol;(2S,3S)-3-Chloro-2-butanol;(2R,3R)-3-Chloro-2-butanolBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 197
198CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistrygroupson the same side of the carbon chain are called the 
erythro enantiomers
(Section22.3). Those with similar groups on opposite sides are called the 
threo enan-
tiomers. Therefore,1and 2are the erythro enantiomers of 3-chloro-2-butanol (the hy-
drogens are on the same side),whereas 
3and 4are the threo enantiomers. In each ofthe Fischer projections shown here,the horizontal bonds project out of the paper to-

ward the viewer and the vertical bonds extend behind the paper away from the viewer.

Groups can rotate freely about the carbon
Ðcarbon single bonds,but Fischer projec-
tions show the stereoisomers in their eclipsed conformations.
A Fischer projection does not show the three-dimensional structure of the molecule,
and it represents the molecule in a relatively unstable eclipsed conformation. Most

chemists,therefore,prefer to use perspective formulas because they show the mole-

culeÕs three-dimensional structure in a stable,staggered conformation,so they provide
a more accurate representation of structure. When perspective formulas are drawn to

show the stereoisomers in their less stable eclipsed conformations,it can easily be

seenÑas the eclipsed Fischer projections show
Ñthat the erythro isomers have similar
groups on the same side. We will use both prespective formulas and Fischer projections

to depict the arrangement of groups bonded to an asymmetric carbon.PROBLEM 18The following compound has only one asymmetric carbon. Why then does it have four
stereoisomers?PROBLEM 19a.Stereoisomers with two asymmetric carbons are called _____ if the configuration of
both asymmetric carbons in one isomer is the opposite of the configuration of the asym-

metric carbons in the other isomer.
b.Stereoisomers with two asymmetric carbons are called _____ if the configuration of
both asymmetric carbons in one isomer is the same as the configuration of the asym-

metric carbons in the other isomer.
c.Stereoisomers with two asymmetric carbons are called _____ if one of the asymmetric
carbons has the same configuration in both isomers and the other asymmetric carbon

has the opposite configuration in the two isomers.
PROBLEM 20a.Howmanyasymmetric carbons does cholesterol have?
b.What is the maximum number of stereoisomers that cholesterol can have?

c.How many of these stereoisomers are found in nature?
cholesterolCH3CH3HHHH3CH3CH3CHOCH3CH2CHCH2CHCHCH
3Br*erythro enantiomersperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of 3-chloro-2-butanol (eclipsed)12ClHClH34H3CHClHOHCH3CHOHCH3CCH3CCCH3HHHOClCCH3CCH3CHHOCH3Cthreo enantiomersTutorial:
Identification of 
asymmetric carbonsBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 198
Section 5.9Isomers with More than One Asymmetric Carbon
199PROBLEM 21Draw the stereoisomers of 2,4-dichlorohexane. Indicate pairs of enantiomers and pairs of
diastereomers.1-Bromo-2-methylcyclopentane also has two asymmetric carbons and four
stereoisomers. Because the compound is cyclic,the substituents can be in either the cis

or the trans configuration. The cis isomer exists as a pair of enantiomers,and the trans

isomer exists as a pair of enantiomers.
1-Bromo-3-methylcyclobutane does not have any asymmetric carbons. C-1 has a
bromine and a hydrogen attached to it,but its other two groups 

are identical; C-3 has a methyl group and a hydrogen attached to it,but its other two

groups are identical. Because the compound does not have a

carbon with four different groups attached to it,it has only two stereoisomers,the cis iso-

mer and the trans isomer. The cis and trans isomers do not have enantiomers.
1-Bromo-3-methylcyclohexane has two asymmetric carbons. The carbon that is
bonded to a hydrogen and a bromine is also bonded to two different carbon-containing

groups and 
so it is an asymmetric carbon. The carbon that is bonded to a hydrogen and a methyl

group is also bonded to two different carbon-containing groups,so it is also an asym-

metric carbon.Because the compound has two asymmetric carbons,it has four stereoisomers. Enan-
tiomers can be drawn for the cis isomer,and enantiomers can be drawn for the trans isomer.
1-Bromo-4-methylcyclohexane has no asymmetric carbons. Therefore,the com-
pound has only one cis isomer and one trans isomer.
HBrHCH3cis-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexaneHBrCH3Htrans-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexanecis-1-bromo-3-methylcyclohexanetrans-1-bromo-3-methylcyclohexaneHBrHCH3HBrHCH3HBrHCH3HBrHCH3HBrHCH3asymmetric carbonasymmetric carbon**these two groups are differentCH2CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH2),(CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH2CH2HHHHBrCH3BrCH3cis-1-bromo-3-methylcyclobutanetrans-1-bromo-3-methylcyclobutane(CH2CH(Br)CH2)(CH2CH(CH3)CH2)HBrH
CH3cis-1-bromo-2-methylcyclopentaneHBrCH3Htrans-1-bromo-2-methylcyclopentaneCH3HHBrH
CH3H
Br3-D Molecules:(1R,2S)-1-Bromo-2-methylcy-clopentane; (1S,2R)-1-Bromo-2-methylcyclopentane;
(1R,2R)-1-Bromo-2-methylcy-clopentane; (1S,2S)-1-Bromo-2-methylcyclopentaneBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 199
200CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPROBLEM 22Draw all possible stereoisomers for each of the following compounds:
a.2-chloro-3-hexanolc.2,3-dichloropentane
b.2-bromo-4-chlorohexaned.1,3-dibromopentane
PROBLEM 23Draw the stereoisomers of 1-bromo-3-chlorocyclohexane.
PROBLEM 24Of all the possible cyclooctanes that have one chloro substituent and one methyl sub-
stituent,which ones do not have any asymmetric carbons?
PROBLEM 25Draw a diastereomer for each of the following.
a.c.
b.d.
5.10Meso CompoundsIn the examples we have just seen,each compound with two asymmetric carbons has
four stereoisomers. However,some compounds with two asymmetric carbons have

only three stereoisomers. This is why we emphasized in Section5.9that the 
maximumnumber of stereoisomers a compound with 
nasymmetric carbons can have (provided
it doesnÕt have any other stereocenters) is instead of stating that a compound with
nasymmetric carbons has stereoisomers.
An example of a compound with two asymmetric carbons that has only three
stereoisomers is 2,3-dibromobutane.
The ÒmissingÓisomer is the mirror image of 1because 1and its mirror image are thesame molecule. This can be seen more clearly if you look either at the perspective for-

mulas drawn in their eclisped conformations or at the Fischer projections.
H3CCH
3HBrHBrCCH3CCH
3HBrBrHCCH3CCH
3BrHHBrCCperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of 2,3-dibromobutane (eclipsed)123
H3CBr
HBrHCH3CH3CHHBrBrCH3CHCH
3BrH3CHBrCCCCperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of 2,3-dibromobutane (staggered)123
CH3CHCHCH3Br2,3-dibromobutaneBr22,HHCH3HOClHCH3CH2ClHCH3CCCCCH3H3CHHCH3CH3OHOHHHBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 200
Section 5.10Meso Compounds
201It is obvious that 
1and its mirror image are identical when looking at the perspective
formula in the eclipsed conformation. To convince yourself that the Fischer projection

of 1and its mirror image are identical,rotate the mirror image by 180
¡. (Remember,
you can move Fischer projections only by rotating them 180¡in the plane of the

paper.)
Stereoisomer 1is called a meso compound. Even though a 
meso(mee-zo)compoundhas asymmetric carbons,it is an achiral molecule because it is superim-
posable on its mirror image. Mesosis the Greek word for 
Òmiddle.ÓA meso com-pound is achiralÑwhen polarized light is passed through a solution of a meso
compound,the plane of polarization is not rotated. A meso compound can be recog-

nized by the fact that it has two or more asymmetric carbons and a plane of symme-

try. 
If a compound has a plane of symmetry,it will not be optically active even though
it has asymmetric carbons
. A plane of symmetry cuts the molecule in half,and one-
half is the mirror image of the other half. Stereoisomer 1has a plane of symmetry,which means that it does nothave a nonsuperimposable mirror image
Ñit does nothave an enantiomer.
It is easy to recognize when a compound with two asymmetric carbons has a
stereoisomer that is a meso compound
Ñthe four atoms or groups bonded to one asym-
metric carbon are identical to the four atoms or groups bonded to the other asymmet-

ric carbon. A compound with the same four atoms or groups bonded to two different

asymmetric carbons will have three stereoisomers:One will be a meso compound,and

the other two will be enantiomers.
enantiomersCH3CH3OHHHOHa meso compounda meso compoundCH3CH3OHOHHHCH3CH3HOHHHOH3CHHOOHHCH3CCCH3CenantiomersH3CHHOHOHCHHOH3CCH3HOHCCH3CCH
3HBrHBrCCmeso compoundsHHHOOH
CH2CH3CH3plane ofsymmetrystereoisomer 1BrCH3HHHHBrCH2CH3OHOHCH2superimposablemirror imagesuperimposablemirror imageCH3CH3BrBrHHCH3CH3HHBrBrH3CCH
3HBrHBrCCH3CCH
3HBrHBrCC1Fischer projections of the stereoisomers of 2,3-dibromobutaneBrCH3CH3HBr
HBrHBr2CH3CH3HHBr3CH3CH3HBr
A meso compound has two or more
asymmetric carbons and a plane of
symmetry.
A meso compound is achiral.A chiral compound cannot have a planeof symmetry.
If a compound with two asymmetric car-bons has the same four groups bonded

to each of the asymmetric carbons, one
of its stereoisomers will be a meso

compound.Movie:Plane of symmetryBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 201
In the case of cyclic compounds,the cis isomer will be the meso compound and the
trans isomer will exist as enantiomers.
The preceding structure for 
cis-1,2-dibromocyclohexane suggests that the com-
pound has a plane of symmetry. Cyclohexane,however,is not a planar hexagon
Ñitexists preferentially in the chair conformation,and the chair conformer of

cis-1,2-dibromocyclohexane does not have a plane of symmetry. Only the much less
stable boat conformer of 
cis-1,2-dibromocyclohexane has a plane of symmetry. Then,
is cis-1,2-dibromocyclohexane a meso compound? The answer is yes. As long as any
one conformer of a compound has a plane of symmetry,the compound will be achiral,

and an achiral compound with two asymmetric carbons is a meso compound.
This holds for acyclic compounds as well. We have just seen that 2,3-dibromo-
butane is an achiral meso compound because it has a plane of symmetry. To see that it

had a plane of symmetry,however,we had to look at a relatively unstable eclipsed

conformer. The more stable staggered conformer does not have a plane of symmetry.

2,3-Dibromobutane is still a meso compound,however,because it has a conformer

that has a plane of symmetry.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Which of the following compounds has a stereoisomer that is a meso compound?
a.2,3-dimethylbutanee.1,4-dimethylcyclohexane
b.3,4-dimethylhexanef.1,2-dimethylcyclohexane

c.2-bromo-3-methylpentaneg.3,4-diethylhexane

d.1,3-dimethylcyclohexaneh.1-bromo-2-methylcyclohexane
eclipsed conformerCH3plane ofsymmetryBrCH3HHBrstaggered conformerCH3no plane ofsymmetryBrCH3HHBrHHBrBrBrBrboat conformerchair conformerno plane of symmetryplane ofsymmetrycis-1,2-dibromocyclohexanetrans-1,2-dibromocyclohexaneHCH3HCH3cis-1,3-dimethylcyclopentanetrans-1,3-dimethylcyclopentanea meso compounda pair of enantiomers
a meso compounda pair of enantiomers
HBrHBrHBrBrHBrHHBrHCH3CH3HH
CH3CH3H202CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry3-D Molecules:cis-1,3-Dimethylcyclopentaneand its mirror imageBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 202
Check each compound to see if it has the necessary requirements to have a stereoisomer
that is a meso compound. That is,does it have two asymmetric carbons with the same four

substituents attached to each of the asymmetric carbons?Compounds A,E,and G do 
nothave a stereoisomer that is a meso compound because
they don
Õt have any asymmetric carbons.
Compounds C and H each have two asymmetric carbons. They do 
nothave a stereoisomer
that is a meso compound because each of the asymmetric carbons is 
notbonded to the
same four substituents.Compounds B,D,and F have a stereoisomer that is a meso compound
Ñthey have two asym-
metric carbons and each asymmetric carbon is bonded to the same four atoms or groups.The isomer that is the meso compound is the one with a plane of symmetry when an
acyclic compound is drawn in its eclipsed conformation (B),or when a cyclic compound is

drawn with a planar ring (D and F).
Now continue on to Problem 26.
PROBLEM 26Which of the following compounds has a stereoisomer that is a meso compound?
a.2,4-dibromohexaned.1,3-dichlorocyclohexane
b.2,4-dibromopentanee.1,4-dichlorocyclohexane

c.2,4-dimethylpentanef.1,2-dichlorocyclobutane
PROBLEM 27SOLVED
Which of the following are chiral?
H3CCH3H3CCH3H3CCH3ClH3CCH3H3CCH3H3CClClClCH3ClClCH3H3CCH3CH3HHH3CFDHCH3HH3CBorCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3HHCH3CH2HHH3CCH2CH3CH3CCFCH3CH3DCH3CH3BCH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3CH3CH3HCH3BrCCH3CHCHCH2CH3CH3BrGCH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3ECH3H3CACH3CHCHCH3CH3CH3Section 5.10Meso Compounds
203BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 203
204CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistrySOLUTIONTo be chiral,a molecule must not have plane of symmetry. Therefore,only
the following compounds are chiral.
In the top row of compounds,only the third compound is chiral. The first,second,and
fourth compounds each have a plane of symmetry. In the bottom row of compounds,the

first and third compounds are chiral. The second and fourth compounds each have a plane

of symmetry.
PROBLEM 28Draw all the stereoisomers for each of the following compounds:
a.1-bromo-2-methylbutaneh.2,4-dichloropentane
b.1-chloro-3-methylpentanei.2,4-dichloroheptane
c.2-methyl-1-propanolj.1,2-dichlorocyclobutane

d.2-bromo-1-butanolk.1,3-dichlorocyclohexane

e.3-chloro-3-methylpentanel.1,4-dichlorocyclohexane
f.3-bromo-2-butanolm.1-bromo-2-chlorocyclobutane

g.3,4-dichlorohexanen.1-bromo-3-chlorocyclobutane
5.11The R,SSystem of Nomenclature for Isomers
with More than One Asymmetric Carbon
If a compound has more than one asymmetric carbon,the steps used to determine
whether an asymmetric carbon has the Ror the Sconfiguration must be applied to each
of the asymmetric carbons individually. As an example,let
Õs name one of thestereoisomers of 3-bromo-2-butanol.
First,we will determine the configuration at C-2. The OH group has the highest prior-
ity,the C-3 carbon (the C attached to Br,C,H) has the next highest priority,is

next,and H has the lowest priority. Because the group with the lowest priority is bond-

ed by a hatched wedge,we can immediately draw an arrow from the group with the

highest priority to the group with the next highest priority. Because that arrow points

counterclockwise,the configuration at C-2 is 
S.Now we need to determine the configuration at C-3. Because the group with the low-
est priority (H) is not bonded by a hatched wedge,we must put it there by temporarily

switching two groups.
H3CHHHOBrCH3CCS1423CH3a stereoisomer of 3-bromo-2-butanolH3CHHHOBrCH3CCH3CCH3CH3H3CClClCH3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 204
Section 5.11The 
R,SSystem of Nomenclature for Isomers with More than One Asymmetric Carbon205The arrow going from the highest priority group (Br) to the next highest priority group
(the C attached to O,C,H) points counterclockwise,suggesting it has the 
Sconfigura-
tion. However,because we switched two groups before we drew the arrow,C-3 has the

opposite configuration
Ñit has the Rconfiguration. Thus,the isomer is named
(2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanol.
Fischer projections with two asymmetric carbons can be named in a similar man-
ner. Just apply the steps to each asymmetric carbon that you learned for a Fischer pro-

jection with one asymmetric carbon. For C-2,the arrow from the group with the

highest priority to the group with the next highest priority points clockwise,suggest-

ing it has the 
Rconfiguration. But because the group with the lowest priority is on a
horizontal bond,we can conclude that C-2 has the 
Sconfiguration (Section5.6).
By repeating these steps for C-3,you will find that it has the 
Rconfiguration. Thus,the
isomer is named (2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanol.
The four stereoisomers of 3-bromo-2-butanol are named as shown here. Take a few
minutes to verify their names.
CH3CH3OHBrHH(2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanol1234RCH3CH3OHBrHH1234S(2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanolH3CHHHOBrCH3CCSRBrHH3CHHHOBrCH3CC2413R(2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanol(2R,3S)-3-bromo-2-butanol(2S,3S)-3-bromo-2-butanol(2R,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanolCH3CH3OHBrHHCH3CH3HHBrHOCH3CH3OHHBrHCH3CH3HBrHHOFischer projections of the stereoisomers of 3-bromo-2-butanolCH3CH3OHBrHHCH3CH3HHBrHOCH3CH3OHHBrHCH3CH3HBrHHO(2S,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanol(2S,3S)-3-bromo-2-butanolperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of 3-bromo-2-butanolH3CHBrOHHCH3CC(2R,3S)-3-bromo-2-butanolHHOH3CBrCH3HCC(2R,3R)-3-bromo-2-butanolHHOH3CHCH3BrCCH3CBrOHHHCH3CCBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 205
PROBLEM 30Chloramphenicol is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is particularly useful against typhoid
fever. What is the configuration of each asymmetric carbon in chloramphenicol?
chloramphenicolNHCCHCl2HOHHCCONO2CH2OH206CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryNotice that enantiomers have the opposite configuration at both asymmetric carbons,
whereas diastereomers have the same configuration at one asymmetric carbon and the

opposite configuration at the other.
PROBLEM 29Draw and name the four stereoisomers of 1,3-dichloro-2-butanol using:
a.perspective formulasb.Fischer projections
Tartaric acid has three stereoisomers because each of its two asymmetric carbons
has the same set of four substituents. The meso compound and the pair of enantiomers

are named as shown.
The physical properties of the three stereoisomers of tartaric acid are listed in
Table5.1. The meso compound and either one of the enantiomers are diastereomers.

Notice that the physical properties of the enantiomers are the same,whereas the phys-

ical properties of the diastereomers are different. Also notice that the physical proper-

ties of the racemic mixture differ from the physical properties of the enantiomers.
(2R,3S)-tartaric acida meso compound(2R,3R)-tartaric acida pair of enantiomersa pair of enantiomersFischer projections of the stereoisomers of tartaric acid(2S,3S)-tartaric acidCOOHCOOHOHOHHHCOOHCOOHOHHHOHCOOHCOOHHOHHHO232323(2R,3S)-tartaric acida meso compoundHOOCHHOHOHCOOHCC(2R,3R)-tartaric acidperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of tartaric acidHOOCHHOOHHCOOHCC(2S,3S)-tartaric acidHHOHOOCHCOOHOHCC223332Tutorial:
Identification of stereoisomers
with multiple asymmetric
carbonsTable 5.1Physical Properties of the Stereoisomers of Tartaric Acid
MeltingSolubility,
point, ¡Cat 15 
¡C(2R,3R)-acid170139
(2S,3S)-acid170139
(2R,3S)-Tartaric acid1400
¡125acid2060
¡139()-Tartaric11.98
¡()-Tartaric11.98
¡()-Tartaricg100 g H2O[A]D25 ¡CBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 206
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Draw perspective formulas for the following compounds:
a.(
R)-2-butanolb.(2
S,3R)-3-chloro-2-pentanola.First draw the compound
Ñignoring the configuration at the asymmetric carbon
Ñsoyou know what groups are bonded to the asymmetric carbon.
Draw the bonds about the asymmetric carbon.
Put the group with the lowest priority on the hatched wedge. Put the group with the
highest priority on any remaining bond.
Because you have been asked to draw the 
Renantiomer,draw an arrow clockwise from
the group with the highest priority to the next available bond and put the group with the

next highest priority on that bond.
Put the remaining substituent on the last available bond.
b.First draw the compound,ignoring the configuration at the asymmetric carbon.
Draw the bonds about the asymmetric carbons.
For each asymmetric carbon,put the group with the lowest priority on the hatched wedge.
For each asymmetric carbon,put the group with the highest priority on a bond such that
an arrow points clockwise (if you want the 
Rconfiguration) or counterclockwise (if you
want the 
Sconfiguration) to the group with the next highest priority.
CCHHCCCH3CHCHCH2CH3OHCl3-chloro-2-pentanol(R)-2-butanolCHOHCH2CH3H3CCHOHCH2CH3COHHCCH3CHCH2CH3OH2-butanolSection 5.11The 
R,SSystem of Nomenclature for Isomers with More than One Asymmetric Carbon207BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 207
Put the remaining substituents on the last available bonds.
Now continue on to Problem 31.
PROBLEM 31Draw perspective formulas for the following compounds:
a.(
S)-3-chloro-1-pentanolc.(2
S,3R)-3-methyl-2-pentanolb.(2
R,3R)-2,3-dibromopentaned.(
R)-1,2-dibromobutane
PROBLEM 32For many centuries,the Chinese have used extracts from a group of herbs known as
ephedra to treat asthma. Chemists have been able to isolate a compound from these herbs,

which they named ephedrine,a potent dilator of air passages in the lungs.
a.How many stereoisomers are possible for ephedrine?
b.The stereoisomer shown here is the one that is pharmacologically active. What is the
configuration of each of the asymmetric carbons?
PROBLEM 33Name the following compounds:
a.c.
b.d.
CH3ClHCCHCH2CH3CH3BrClHOOHHCCHCH3CH2CH3ClClNHCH3CCHOHCH3HCHCHNHCH3OHCH3ephedrineH3CCH2CH3CCHHOClH(2S,3R)-3-chloro-2-pentanolCCHHOClHSR208CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 208
Section 5.12Reactions of Compounds that Contain an Asymmetric Carbon
2095.12Reactions of Compounds that Containan Asymmetric CarbonWhen a compound that contains an asymmetric carbon undergoes a reaction,what
happens to the configuration of the asymmetric carbon depends on the reaction. If the

reaction does not break any of the four bonds to the asymmetric carbon,then the rela-

tive positions of the groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon will not change. For ex-

ample,when (
S)-1-chloro-3-methylhexane reacts with hydroxide ion,OH substitutes
for Cl. The reactant and the product have the same 
relative configuration
because thereaction does not break any of the bonds to the asymmetric carbon.
A word of warning:
If the four groups bonded to the asymmetric carbon maintain
their relative positions,it does not necessarily mean that an 
Sreactant will always
yield an Sproduct as occurred in the preceding reaction. In the following example,the
groups maintained their relative positions during the reaction. Therefore,the reactant

and the product have the same 
relative configurations
. However,the reactant has the 
Sconfiguration,whereas the product has the 
Rconfiguration. Although,the groups
maintained their relative positions,their relative priorities
Ñas defined by the Cahn
ÐIngoldÐPrelog rulesÑchanged (Section5.5). The change in priorities
Ñnot the changein positions of the groupsÑis what caused the Sreactant to become an Rproduct.The reactant and product in this example have the same relative configuration,but they
have different 
absolute configurations
Ñthe reactant has the Sconfiguration,where-
as the product has the 
Rconfiguration. The actual configuration is called the absolute
configuration to indicate that the configuration is known in an absolute sense rather

than in a relative sense. Knowing the 
absolute configuration
of a compound means
that you know whether it has the 
Ror the Sconfiguration. Knowing that two com-
pounds have the same 
relative configuration
means that they have the same relative
positions of their substituents.We have just seen that if the reaction does not break any of the bonds to the asym-
metric carbon,the reactant and product will have the same relative configuration. In

contrast,if the reaction 
does break
a bond to the asymmetric carbon,the product can
have the same relative configuration as the reactant or it can have the opposite relative

configuration. Which of the products is actually formed depends on the mechanism of

the reaction. Therefore,we cannot predict what the configuration of the product will

be unless we know the mechanism of the reaction.
CHCH2CH3YCHCH2CH3ZCH3CH3CYÐZÐHCH2CH3ZCH3has the same relativeconfiguration as
the reactanthas a relative
configuration opposite
to that of the reactantCHCHCH3CH3CH2CH2H2(S)-3-methylhexene(
R)-3-methylhexaneCH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3Pd/CCHCHCH3CH3CH2HOÐ(S)-1-chloro-3-methylhexane(
S)-3-methyl-1-hexanolCH2CH2ClCHCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OHIf a reaction does not break a bond to
the asymmetric carbon, the reactant and

the product will have the same relative

configurations.If a reaction does break a bond to the
asymmetric carbon, you cannot predict

the configuration of the product unless

you know the mechanism of the
reaction.
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 209
210CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPROBLEM 34SOLVED
(S)-can be converted to -2-methylbutanoic acid without
breaking any of the bonds to the asymmetric carbon. What is the configuration of 
-2-methylbutanoic acid?
SOLUTIONWe know that -2-methylbutanoic acid has the relative configuration
shown because it was formed from (
S)--2-methyl-1-butanol without breaking any
bonds to the asymmetric carbon. Therefore,we know that -2-methylbutanoic acid has

the Sconfiguration. We can conclude then that -2-methylbutanoic acid has the 
Rconfiguration.
PROBLEM 35The stereoisomer of 1-iodo-2-methylbutane with the 
Sconfiguration rotates the plane of po-
larized light counterclockwise. The following reaction results in an alcohol that rotates the

plane of polarized light clockwise. What is the configuration of -2-methyl-1-butanol?
5.13The Absolute Configurationof-Glyceraldehyde
Glyceraldehyde has one chirality center and,therefore,has two stereoisomers. The ab-
solute configuration of glyceraldehde was not known until 1951. Until then,chemists

did not know whether -glyceraldehyde had the 
Ror the Sconfiguration,although
they had arbitrarily decided that it had the 
Rconfiguration. They had a 50
Ð50 chanceof being correct.The configurations of many organic compounds were 
ÒdeterminedÓby synthesiz-
ing them from -or -glyceraldehyde or by converting them to -or -

glyceraldehyde,always using reactions that did not break any of the bonds to the

asymmetric carbon. For example,-lactic could be related to -glyceraldehyde

through the following reactions. Thus the configuration of -lactic was assumed to

be that shown below. Because it was assumed that -glyceraldehyde was the 
Renan-tiomer,the configurations assigned to these molecules were relative configurations,

not absolute configurations. They were relative to -glyceraldehyde,and were based

on the assumptionthat -glyceraldehyde had the 
Rconfiguration.
()()()()()()()()()()(R)-()-glyceraldehydeCHHCOCH2OHHO(S)-()-glyceraldehydeCHHCOHOCH2OH()()CHHOÐCH2ICH2CH3CH3CHIÐCH2OHCH2CH3CH3()()()()()CHCH2OHCH3CHCOOHCH3CH3CH2CH3CH2(S)-()-2-methyl-1-butanol(
)-2-methylbutanoic acid()()()-2-Methyl-1-butanol()-glyceraldehydeCHHCHgOOCOOHCOOHCOOH
CH2OHHO()-glyceric acidCHCOOHCH2OH HO()-isoserineCHCH2NH3HOH2OHNO2HBrNaNO2H+Zn()-3-bromo-2-hydroxypropanoic acidCHCH2BrHO()-lactic acidCHCH3HOBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 210
Section 5.14Separating Enantiomers
211In 1951,the Dutch chemists J. M. Bijvoet,A. F. Peerdeman,and A. J. van Bommel,
using X-ray crystallography and a new technique known as anomalous dispersion,

determined that the sodium rubidium salt of -tartaric acid had the 
R,Rconfigu-
ration. Because -tartaric acid could be synthesized from -glyceraldehyde,
-glyceraldehyde had to be the 
Senantiomer. The assumption,therefore,that 
-glyceraldehyde had the Rconfiguration was correct!
The work of these chemists immediately provided absolute configurations for all
those compounds whose relative configurations had been determined by relating

them to -glyceraldehyde. Thus,-lactic acid has the configuration shown

above. If -glyceraldehyde had been the 
Senantiomer,-lactic acid would have
had the opposite configuration.
PROBLEM 36What is the absolute configuration of the following?
a.acidc.
b.d.acid
PROBLEM 37Which of the following is true?
a.If two compounds have the same relative configuration,they will have the same ab-
solute configuration.
b.If two compounds have the same relative configuration and you know the absolute
configuration of either one of them,you can determine the absolute configuration of the

other.
c.If two compounds have the same relative configuration,you can determine the absolute
configuration of only one of them.
d.An 
Rreactant always forms an 
Sproduct.5.14Separating EnantiomersEnantiomers cannot be separated by the usual separation techniques such as fractional
distillation or crystallization because their identical boiling points and solubilities
cause them to distill or crystallize simultaneously. Louis Pasteur was the first to sepa-

rate a pair of enantiomers successfully. While working with crystals of sodium ammo-

nium tartrate,he noted that the crystals were not identical
Ñsome of the crystals wereÒright-handedÓand some were 
Òleft-handed.ÓHe painstakingly separated the two
kinds of crystals with a pair of tweezers. He found that a solution of the right-handed

crystals rotated the plane of polarized light clockwise,whereas a solution of the left-

handed crystals rotated the plane of polarized light counterclockwise.sodium ammoniumtartrateright-handed crystalsCOONaCOONH4OHHHOHsodium ammoniumtartrateleft-handed crystalsCOONaCOONH4HOHHHO()-lactic()-isoserine()-glyceraldehyde()-glyceric()()()()()-glyceraldehydeseveral steps()-tartaric acidHHOHCOCH2OHHHOCOOHCOOHOHHRRS()()()()()BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 211
212CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPasteur was only 26 years old at the time and was unknown in scientific circles. He
was concerned about the accuracy of his observations because a few years earlier,the

well-known German organic chemist Eilhardt Mitscherlich had reported that crystals

of the same salt were all identical. Pasteur immediately reported his findings to Jean-

Baptiste Biot and repeated the experiment with Biot present. Biot was convinced that

Pasteur had successfully separated the enantiomers of sodium ammonium tartrate.

Pasteur
Õs experiment also created a new chemical term. Tartaric acid is obtained from
grapes,so it was also called racemic acid (
racemus
is Latin for Òa bunch of grapes
Ó).When Pasteur found that tartaric acid was actually a mixture of enantiomers,he

called it a Òracemic mixture.ÓSeparation of enantiomers is called the resolution of a
racemic mixture
.Later,chemists recognized how lucky Pasteur had been. Sodium ammonium tar-
trate forms asymmetric crystals only under certain conditionsÑprecisely the condi-tions that Pasteur had employed. Under other conditions,the symmetrical crystals

that had fooled Mitscherlich are formed. But to quote Pasteur,
ÒChance favors the
prepared mind.ÓSeparating enantiomers by hand,as Pasteur did,is not a universally useful method to
resolve a racemic mixture because few compounds form asymmetric crystals. A more

commonly used method is to convert the enantiomers into diastereomers. Diastere-

omers can be separated because they have different physical properties. After separa-

tion,the individual diastereomers are converted back into the original enantiomers.
For example,because an acid reacts with a base to form a salt,a racemic mixture of
a carboxylic acid reacts with a naturally occurring optically pure (a single enantiomer)
base to form two diastereomeric salts. Morphine,strychnine,and brucine are examples

of naturally occurring chiral bases commonly used for this purpose. The chiral base

exists as a single enantiomer because when a chiral compound is synthesized in a liv-

ing system,generally only one enantiomer is formed (Section5.20). When an 
R-acidreacts with an S-base,an 
R,S-salt will be formed; when an 
S-acid reacts with an
S-base,an 
S,S-salt will be formed.One of the asymmetric carbons in the 
R,S-salt is identical to an asymmetric carbon inthe S,S-salt,and the other asymmetric carbon in the 
R,S-salt is the mirror image of anasymmetric carbon in the S,S-salt. Therefore,the salts are diastereomers and have dif-
R-acidCHCOOHCH3HOS-acidS-baseenantiomersR,S-saltdiastereomersseparated enantiomersseparateCOHCOOHCH3HR-acidCHHClHCl
COOHCH3HOS-baseH S-baseHS-acidCOHCOOHCH3HCHOCOOS-baseHHCH3S,S-saltCHCOO S-baseHOHCH3R,S-saltCHOCOOS-baseHHCH3S,S-saltCHCOOS-baseHOHCH3Eilhardt Mitscherlich (1794Ð1863),a German chemist,first studied medi-

cine so he could travel to Asia
Ñaway to satisfy his interest in Oriental

languages. He later became fascinat-

ed by chemistry. He was a professor

of chemistry at the University of

Berlin and wrote a successful chem-

istry textbook that was published in

1829.The French chemist and microbiolo-
gist Louis Pasteur (1822
Ð1895)wasthe first to demonstrate that microbes

cause specific diseases. Asked by the

French wine industry to find out why

wine often went sour while aging,he

showed that microorganisms cause

grape juice to ferment,producing

wine,and cause wine to slowly be-

come sour. Gently heating the wine

after fermentation,a process called

pasteurization,kills the organisms so

they cannot sour the wine.
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 212
Section 5.15Discrimination of Enantiomers by Biological Molecules
213ferent physical properties,so they can be separated. After separation,they can be con-
verted back to the carboxylic acids by adding a strong acid such as HCl. The chiral

base can be separated from the carboxylic acid and used again.Enantiomers can also be separated by a technique called chromatography
. In thismethod,the mixture to be separated is dissolved in a solvent and the solution is passed

through a column packed with material that tends to adsorb organic compounds. If the

chromatographic column is packed with 
chiral
material,the two enantiomers can be
expected to move through the column at different rates because they will have differ-

ent affinities for the chiral material
Ñjust as a right hand prefers a right-hand glove
Ñso one enantiomer will emerge from the column before the other. The chiral material is

an example of a 
chiral probe
Ñit can distinguish between enantiomers. A polarimeter
is another example of a chiral probe (Section5.7). In the next section you will see two

kinds of biological molecules that are chiral probes
Ñenzymes and receptors,both of
which are proteins.5.15Discrimination of Enantiomersby Biological MoleculesEnzymesEnantiomers can be separated easily if they are subjected to reaction conditions that
cause only one of them to react. Enantiomers have the same chemical properties,so

they react with 
achiral
reagents at the same rate. Thus,hydroxide ion (an achiral
reagent) reacts with (R)-2-bromobutane at the same rate that it reacts with
(S)-2-bromobutane. However,
chiral
molecules recognize only one enantiomer,so if a
synthesis is carried out using a chiral reagent or a chiral catalyst,only one enantiomer

will undergo the reaction. One example of a 
chiral catalystis an enzyme. An enzymeis a protein that catalyzes a chemical reaction. The enzyme 
D-amino acid oxidase,for
example,catalyzes only the reaction of the 
Renantiomer and leaves the 
Senantiomerunchanged. The product of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction can be easily separated

from the unreacted enantiomer. If you imagine an enzyme to be a right-hand glove and

the enantiomers to be a pair of hands,the enzyme typically binds only one enantiomer

because only the right hand fits into the right-hand glove.
The problem of having to separate enantiomers can be avoided if a synthesis is car-
ried out that forms one of the enantiomers preferentially. Non-enzymatic chiral cata-

lysts are being developed that will synthesize one enantiomer in great excess over the

other. If a reaction is carried out with a reagent that does not have an asymmetric car-

bon and forms a product with an asymmetric carbon,a racemic mixture of the product

will be formed. For example,the catalytic hydrogenation of 2-ethyl-1-pentene forms

equal amounts of the two enantiomers because can be delivered equally easily to

both faces of the double bond (Section5.18).
C+CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2H2Pd/CCH3CH2HCCH3CH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3CHCH3CH2CH2(R)-3-methylhexane(
S)-3-methylhexane50%50%
H2COOHRCNHR enantiomeroxidized
R enantiomerS enantiomerOOCunreactedS enantiomerD-amino acidoxidaseCRNH2COOHCRH2NH2NCOOHCRCrystals of potassium hydrogentartrate. Grapes are unusual in that
they produce large quantities of
tartaric acid, whereas most fruits
produce citric acid.An achiral reagent reacts identically
with both enantiomers. A sock, which is
achiral, fits on either foot.A chiral reagent reacts differently with
each enantiomer. A shoe, which is chiral,

fits on only one foot.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 213
214CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryIf,however,the metal is complexed to a chiral organic molecule,will be delived to
only one face of the double bond. One such chiral catalyst
Ñusing Ru(II) as the metaland BINAP (-bis(diphenylphosphino)--binaphthyl) as the chiral molecule
Ñhas been used to synthesize (
S)-naproxen,the active ingredient in Aleve and several
other over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,in greater than 98%

enantiomeric excess.
PROBLEM 38What percent of naproxen is obtained as the 
Senantiomer in the above synthesis?
ReceptorsA receptor is a protein that binds a particular molecule. Because a receptor is chiral,it
will bind one enantiomer better than the other. In Figure5.3the receptor binds the

Renantiomer but it does not bind the 
Senantiomer.
Because a receptor typically recognizes only one enantiomer,different physiological
properties may be associated with each enantiomer. Receptors located on the exterior of

nerve cells in the nose,for example,are able to perceive and differentiate the estimated

10,000 smells to which they are exposed. (
R)--carvone is found in spearmint oil,
and (S)--carvone is the main constituent of caraway seed oil. The reason these two
enantiomers have such different odors is that each fits into a different receptor.
OCCH3CH262.5H3C(R)-()-carvonespearmint oilOCCH3CH2H3C(S)-()-carvonecaraway seed oil[]20     D62.5CC[]20     D()()H2(R)-BINAPRu(II)(S) naproxen98% eeCCOHCH3HOCH3OCCOHOCH3OCH21,12,2H2R enantiomerbinding site of the receptorS enantiomerbinding site of the receptorFigure 5.3
Schematic diagram showing whyonly one enantiomer is bound by a
receptor. One enantiomer fits into

the binding site and one does not.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 214
Section 5.16Enantiotopic Hydrogens, Diastereotopic Hydrogens, and Prochiral Carbons
215Many drugs exert their physiological activity by binding to cellular receptors. If the
drug has an asymmetric carbon,the receptor can preferentially bind one of the enan-

tiomers. Thus,enantiomers can have the same physiological activities,different de-

grees of the same activity,or very differentactivities.
THE ENANTIOMERS OF THALIDOMIDEThalidomide was approved as a sedative for use in
Europe and Canada in 1956. It was not approved for use in the

United States because some neurological side effects had been

noted. The dextrorotatory isomer has stronger sedative proper-

ties,but the commercial drug was a racemic mixture. However,

it wasn
Õt recognized that the levorotatory isomer was highly
teratogenicÑit causes horrible birth defects
Ñuntil it was no-
ticed that women who were given the drug during the first three

months of pregnancy gave birth to babies with a wide variety of

defects,such as deformed limbs. It was eventually determined

that the dextrorotatory isomer also has mild teratogenic activity
and that both enantiomers racemize in vivo. Thus,it is not clear
whether giving those women only the dextrorotatory isomer

would have decreased the severity of the birth defects. Thalido-

mide recently has been approved
Ñwith restrictions
Ñto treatleprosy as well as melanomas.thalidomideNOOOONHasymmetric carbonCHIRAL DRUGSUntil relatively recently,most drugs have been
marketed as racemic mixtures because of the high
cost of separating the enantiomers. In 1992,the Food and Drug

Administration (FDA) issued a policy statement encouraging

drug companies to use recent advances in synthetic and separa-

tion techniques to develop single enantiomer drugs. Now one-

third of all drugs sold are single enantiomers. A new treatment

for asthma is a single-enantiomer drug called Singulair. The

antidepresanets Zoloft¨and Paxil
¨(single enantiomers) arecutting into Prozac¨Õs (a racemate) market. Testing of single-
enantiomer drugs is simpler because if a drug is sold as a race-

mate,the FDA requres that both enantiomers be tested. Testing

has shown that (
S)--ketamine is four times more potent an
()anesthetic than (R)--ketamine and,even more important,
the disturbing side effects appear to be associated only with the

(R)--enantiomer. The activity of ibuprofen,the popular
analgesic marketed as Advil
¨,Nuprin
¨,and Motrin
¨,resides
primarily in the (S)--enantiomer. The FDA has some con-
cern about approving the drug as a single enantiomer because

of potential drug overdoses. Can people who are used to taking

two pills be convinced to take only one? Heroin addicts can be

maintained with -acetylmethadol for a 72-hour period

compared to 24 hours with racemic methadone. This means less

frequent visits to the clinic,and a single dose can get an addict

through an entire weekend. Another reason for the increase in

single-enantiomeric drugs is that drug companies may be able

to extend their patents by developing a drug as a single enan-

tiomer that was marketed previously as a racemate.
()-a()()()5.16Enantiotopic Hydrogens, Diastereotopic
Hydrogens, and Prochiral Carbons
If a carbon is bonded to two hydrogens and to two different groups,the two hydrogens
are called enantiotopic hydrogens
. For example,the two hydrogens (and ) in
the group of ethanol are enantiotopic hydrogens because the other two groups

bonded to the carbon (and OH) are not identical. Replacing an enantiotopic hy-

drogen by a deuterium (or any other atom or group other than or OH) forms a chi-

ral molecule.CH3COH
HbHaenantiotopichydrogenenantiotopic
hydrogenCH3CH3CH2HbHaBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 215
216CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryThe carbon to which the enantiotopic hydrogens are attached is called a 
prochiral
carbonbecause it will become a chirality center (an asymmetric carbon) if one of thehydrogens is replaced by a deuterium (or any group other than or OH). If the 

hydrogen is replaced by a deuterium,the asymmetric carbon will have the 
Rconfigu-
ration. Thus,the hydrogen is called the 
pro-
R-hydrogen
. The hydrogen is
called the pro-
S-hydrogen
because if it is replaced by a deuterium,the asymmetric
carbon will have the 
Sconfiguration. The molecule containing the prochiral carbon is
called a prochiral molecule because it would become a chiral molecule if one of the

enantiotopic hydrogens is replaced.The pro-R-and pro-
S-hydrogens are chemically equivalent,so they have the same
chemical reactivity and cannot be distinguished by achiral reagents. For example,

when ethanol is oxidized by pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC) to acetaldehyde,one

of the enantiotopic hydrogens is removed. (PCC is discussed in Section20.2.) Because

the two hydrogens are chemically equivalent,half the product results from removing

the hydrogen and the other half results from removing the hydrogen.
Enantiotopic hydrogens,however,are not chemically equivalent toward chiral
reagents. An enzyme can distinguish between them because an enzyme is chiral

(Section5.15). For example,when the oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde is cat-

alyzed by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase,only one of the enantiotopic hydrogens
is removed.
If a carbon is bonded to two hydrogens and replacing each of them in turn with deu-
terium (or another group) creates a pair of diastereomers,the hydrogens are called

diastereotopic hydrogens
.Ha and Hb are diastereotopic hydrogensCH3CH3BrHCH3HbBrHDCH3CH3CH3DBrHHbHaHareplace Ha with a Ddiastereomersdiastereotopichydrogensreplace Hb with a DCH3CO100%CH3COH
HbHbHaalcoholdehydrogenase(Ha)HaHbHbHaCH3COH
CH3COCH3COPCCpyridine50%50%
HbHaCH3OHHbHapro-R-hydrogenprochiralcarbonpro-S-hydrogenHbHaHaCH3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 216
Section 5.17Nitrogen and Phosphorus Chirality Centers
217Unlike enantiotopic hydrogens,diastereotopic hydrogens do not have the same reac-
tivity with achiral reagents. For example,in Chapter11we will see that because

trans
-2-butene is more stable than 
cis-2-butene (Section4.11),removal of and Br
to form trans
-2-butene occurs more rapidly than removal of and Br to form
cis-2-butene.
PROBLEM 39Tell whether the and hydrogens in each of the following compounds are enan-
tiotopic,diastereotopic,or neither.
a.c.
b.d.
5.17Nitrogen and Phosphorus Chirality Centers
Atoms other than asymmetric carbons can be chirality centers. When an atom such as
nitrogen or phosphorus has four different groups or atoms attached to it and it has a

tetrahedral geometry,it is a chirality center. A compound with a chirality center can

exist as enantiomers,and the enantiomers can be separated.
If one of the four ÒgroupsÓattached to nitrogen is a lone pair,the enantiomers can-
not be separated because they interconvert rapidly at room temperature. This is called

amine inversion
(Section21.2). One way to picture amine inversion is to compare it
to an umbrella that turns inside out in a windstorm.R2NR1transition stateR3NR2R3R1NR2R3R1sp3sp3sp2p orbitalàCH3CHCHaHbHBrH
bHaHaHbCH3CH2CCH3HbHaHbHacis-2-buteneHaBrslowerCH3CH3BrHHH3CH3CCCHbBrfasterHH3CCCH3HbHaHbHaCtrans-2-buteneHaHbenantiomersCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3HHNNCH3CH3enantiomersOCH3CH3OCH3CH2OOCH2CH3HHPPOOBrBrBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 217
218CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPROBLEM 40Compound A has two stereoisomers,but compounds B and C exist as single compounds.
Explain.5.18Stereochemistry of Reactions: Regioselective,
Stereoselective, and Stereospecific Reactions
In Chapter 4we saw that alkenes undergo electrophilic addition reactions,and we
looked at the different kinds of reagents that add to alkenes. We also examined the

step-by-step process by which each reaction occurs (the mechanism of the reaction),

and we determined what products are formed. However,we did not consider the stere-

ochemistry of the reactions.Stereochemistry
is the field of chemistry that deals with the structures of mole-
cules in three dimensions. When we study the stereochemistry of a reaction,we are

concerned with the following questions:
1.If a reaction product can exist as two or more stereoisomers,does the reaction
produce a single stereoisomer,a set of particular stereoisomers,or all possible

stereoisomers?2.If stereoisomers are possible for the reactant,do all stereoisomers react to form
the same stereoisomeric product,or does each reactant form a different stereo-

isomer or a different set of stereoisomers?
Before we examine the stereochemistry of electrophilic addition reactions,we need
to become familiar with some terms used in describing the stereochemistry of a

reaction.In Section4.4we saw that a 
regioselective
reaction is one in which two
constitutional isomers
can be obtained as products but more of one is obtained than
of the other. In other words,a regioselective reaction selects for a particular consti-

tutional isomer. Recall that a reaction can be 
moderately regioselective
,highly re-
gioselective,or 
completely regioselective
depending on the relative amounts of the
constitutional isomers formed in the reaction.Stereoselective
is a similar term,but it refers to the preferential formation of a
stereoisomer
rather than a constitutional isomer. If a reaction that generates a car-
bonÐcarbon double bond or an asymmetric carbon in a product forms one stereoiso-
mer preferentially over another,it is a stereoselective reaction. In other words,it

selects for a particular stereoisomer. Depending on the degree of preference for a par-

ticular stereoisomer,a reaction can be described as being 
moderately stereoselective
,highly stereoselective
,or 
completely stereoselective
.more B is formed than C 
a regioselective reaction
constitutionalisomersABC
AH3CCH2CH3ClClCH+CH2NBCH+CH2CHCH2NCH3CCH3HNHH3CHA regioselective reaction forms more of
one constitutional isomer than of
another.
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 218
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
219Tutorial:
Common terms 
in stereochemistryA reaction is stereospecific
if the reactant can exist as stereoisomers and each
stereoisomeric reactant leads to a different stereoisomeric product or a different set

ofstereoisomeric products.
In the preceding reaction,stereoisomer A forms stereoisomer B but does not form D,
so the reaction is stereoselective in addition to being stereospecific. 
All stereospecific
reactions
,therefore
,are also stereoselective
. All stereoselective reactions are not
stereospecific
,however,because there are stereoselective reactions in which the reac-
tant does not have a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond or an asymmetric carbon,so it cannot
exist as stereoisomers.
5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition
Reactions of AlkenesNow that you are familiar with electrophilic addition reactions and with stereoisomers,
we can combine the two topics and look at the stereochemistry of electrophilic addi-

tion reactions. In other words,we will look at the stereoisomers that are formed in the

electrophilic addition reactions that were discussed in Chapter4.
In Chapter4we saw that when an alkene reacts with an electrophilic reagent
such as HBr,the major product of the addition reaction is the one obtained by

adding the electrophile to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hy-

drogens and adding the nucleophile to the other carbon. For example,

the major product obtained from the reaction of propene with HBr is 2-bromo-

propane. This particular product does not have stereoisomers because it does not

have an asymmetric carbon. Therefore,we do not have to be concerned with the

stereochemistry of this reaction.If,however,the reaction creates a product with an asymmetric carbon,we need to
know which stereoisomers are formed. For example,the reaction of HBr with

1-butene forms 2-bromobutane,a compound with an asymmetric carbon. What is the

configuration of the product? Do we get the 
Renantiomer,the 
Senantiomer,or both?
CH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CHCH3CH21-buteneHBrBrCH3CH2CHCH3Br2-bromobutaneasymmetric carbonCH3CHCH
3CHCH3CH2propeneHBrBrCH3CHCH3Br2-bromopropanemajor productsp2(Br)sp2(H)ABCDstereospecific reactions
stereoisomersstereoisomersmore B is formed than C
ABC
a stereoselective reaction
stereoisomersA stereoselective reaction forms more of
one stereoisomer than of another.
In a stereospecific reaction each
stereoisomer forms a different

stereoisomeric product or a different set

of stereoisomeric products.
A stereospecific reaction is also stereo-
selective. A stereoselective reaction is

not necessarily stereospecific.
BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 219
220CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryIn discussing the stereochemistry of electrophilic addition reactions,we will look
first at reactions that form a product with one asymmetric carbon. Then we will look at

reactions that form a product with two asymmetric carbons.
Addition Reactions that Form One Asymmetric CarbonWhen a reactant that does not have an asymmetric carbon undergoes a reaction that

forms a product with 
oneasymmetric carbon,the product will be a racemic mixture.
For example,the reaction of 1-butene with HBr forms identical amounts of

(R)-2-bromobutane and (
S)-2-bromobutane. Thus,an electrophilic addition reaction
that forms a compound with one asymmetric carbon from a reactant without any

asymmetric carbons is not stereoselective because it does not select for a particular

stereoisomer. Why is this so?
You will see why a racemic mixture is obtained if you examine the structure of
the carbocation formed in the first step of the reaction. The positively charged

carbon is hybridized,so the three atoms to which it is bonded lie in a plane

(Section1.10). When the bromide ion approaches the positively charged carbon

from above the plane,one enantiomer is formed,but when it approaches from below

the plane,the other enantiomer is formed. Because the bromide ion has equal access

to both sides of the plane,identical amounts of the 
Rand Senantiomers are obtained
from the reaction.PROBLEM 41a.Is the reaction of 2-butene with HBr regioselective?
b.Is it stereoselective?

c.Is it stereospecific?

d.Is the reaction of 1-butene with HBr regioselective?

e.Is it stereoselective?

f.Is it stereospecific?
When HBr adds to 2-methyl-1-butene in the presence of a peroxide,the product has
one asymmetric carbon. Therefore,we can predict that identical amounts of the 
RandSenantiomers are formed.CH3CH2CCH
2CH32-methyl-1-buteneHBrperoxideCH3CH2CHCH2BrCH31-bromo-2-methylbutane*asymmetriccarbonCH3CH3CCCH3CH2Br(S)-2-bromobutane(R)-2-bromobutaneHCH3CH3CH2HBrCBrCH3CH2Hsp2Tutorial:
Review addition of HBr
tutorial in Chapter 3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 220
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
221The product is a racemic mixture because the carbon in the radical intermediate thatbears the unpaired electron is hybridized. This means that the three atoms bonded

to it are all in the same plane (Section1.10). Consequently,identical amounts of the 
Renantiomer and the Senantiomer will be obtained because HBr has equal access to
both sides of the radical. (Although the unpaired electron is shown to be in the top lobe

of the porbital,it actually is spread out equally through both lobes.)
PROBLEM 42What stereoisomers are obtained from each of the following reactions?
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
If a reaction creates an asymmetric carbon in a compound that already has an asym-
metric carbon,a pair of diastereomers will be formed. For example,let
Õs look at thefollowing reaction. Because none of the bonds to the asymmetric carbon in the reac-

tant is broken during the addition of HBr,the configuration of this asymmetric carbon

does not change. The bromide ion can approach the planar carbocation intermediate

from either the top or the bottom in the process of creating the new asymmetric car-

bon,so two stereoisomers result. The stereoisomers are diastereomers because one of

the asymmetric carbons has the same configuration in both isomers and the other has

opposite configurations in the two isomers.
H3CCH3H3CHHBrperoxideCCH3CCH3H3CCH2CH2CH3H2Pt/CCCH3CCH3H3CHHBrCCCCHH2OHHCH3CH2CH2CH3H3CHBrCH3CH2CH2CHCH
2HClsp2CH2BrCCH3CH2H(R)-1-bromo-2-methyl-butane(S)-1-bromo-2-methyl-butaneBrCH3CH2BrCH3CH2CH3HCCH2BrCH3CH3CH2HCH3CClCHCHCH2ClH3CCCCH3BrHHClH3CCCCH3BrHHH3CClCHCH3CHHBrBrdiastereomersstereoisomers(R)-3-chloro-1-buteneconfiguration doesnot changenew asymmetric
carbonBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 221
222CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryBecause the products of the preceding reaction are diastereomers,the transition
states that lead to them are also diastereomeric. The two transition states,therefore,

will not have the same stability,so different amounts of the two diastereomers will be

formed. The reaction is stereoselective
Ñmore of one stereoisomer is formed than oftheother.
Addition Reactions that Form Products 
with Two Asymmetric Carbons
When a reactant that does not have an asymmetric carbon undergoes a reaction that
forms a product with 
twoasymmetric carbons,the stereoisomers that are formed de-
pend on the mechanism of the reaction.1. Addition Reactions that Form a Carbocation Intermediate or a Radical IntermediateIf two asymmetric carbons are created as the result of an addition reaction that forms a
carbocation intermediate,four stereoisomers can be obtained as products.
In the first step of the reaction,the proton can approach the plane containing the
double-bonded carbons of the alkene from above or below to form the carbocation.

Once the carbocation is formed,the chloride ion can approach the positively charged

carbon from above or below. As a result,four stereoisomers are obtained as products:

The proton and the chloride ion can add from above-above,above-below,below-

above,or below-below. When the two substituents add to the same side of the double

bond,the addition is called 
syn addition. When the two substituents add to opposite
sides of the double bond,the addition is called 
anti addition. Both syn and anti addi-tion occur in alkene addition reactions that take place by way of a carbocation inter-

mediate. Because the four stereoisomers formed by the cis alkene are identical to the

four stereoisomers formed by the trans alkene,the reaction is not stereospecific.
Similarly,if two asymmetric carbons are created as the result of an addition reac-
tion that forms a radical intermediate,four stereoisomers can be formed because

both syn and anti addition are possible. And because the stereoisomers formed by

the cis isomer are identical to those formed by the trans isomer,the reaction is not

stereospecific
Ñin a stereospecific reaction,the cis and trans isomers form different
stereoisomers.Fischer projections of the stereoisomers of the productCH2CH3ClHCH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3ClHHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3ClCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3ClHCH2CH3HClCH
3CH2CHCCH
2CH3CH3CH3ClCH3CH2CH2CH3H3Ccis-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexene3-chloro-3,4-dimethylhexane
CH3new asymmetriccarbonsCCperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of the productClCH3CCCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3HCH3ClCCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3HCH3ClCCCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3HClCH3CCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3HBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 222
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
2232. Stereochemistry of Hydrogen Addition
In a catalytic hydrogenation,the alkene sits on the surface of the metal catalyst and
both hydrogen atoms add to the same side of the double bond (Section4.11). There-

fore,the addition of to an alkene is a syn addition reaction.
If addition of hydrogen to an alkene forms a product with two asymmetric carbons,
only two of the four possible stereoisomers are obtained because only syn addition can

occur. (The other two stereoisomers would have to come from anti addition.) One

stereoisomer results from addition of both hydrogens from above the plane of the dou-

ble bond,and the other stereoisomer results from addition of both hydrogens from

below the plane. The particular pair of stereoisomers that is formed depends on

whether the reactant is a cis-alkene or a 
trans
-alkene. Syn addition of to a 
cis-alkene forms only the erythro enantiomers. (In Section5.8,we saw that the erythro

enantiomers are the ones with identical groups on the same side of the carbon chain in
the eclisped conformers.)H2PtHHCCaddition of H2 is a syn additionHHCCH2Fischer projections of the stereoisomers of the productCH2CH3HHBrBr
CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3HCH3BrCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3BrCH3HCH2CH3HBrCH
3CH2CHCCH
2CH3CH3CH3BrH2O2CH3CH2CH2CH3H3Ccis-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexene3-bromo-3,4-dimethylhexane
new asymmetriccarbonsCH3**CCBrCH3CCCH2CH3CH3CH2HHBrCCCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3HCH3BrCCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3HCH3CH3CCCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3HBrperspective formulas of the stereoisomers of the productHHHCCH3CCH2CH3CH2CH3cis-2,3-dideuterio-2-penteneerythro enantiomersFischer projectionserythro enantiomersperspective formulas(eclipsed conformers)erythro enantiomersperspective formulas(staggered conformers)DDPt/CH2CH3HDHDCH2CH3CH3DHDHCH2CH3CH2CH3H3CDDCCHHCCH3CDDCH2CH3HH3CDDCCHHCCDDCH2CH3H3CBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 223
224CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryIf each of the two asymmetric carbons is bonded to the same four substituents,a
meso compound will be obtained instead of the erythro enantiomers.In contrast,syn addition of to a 
trans
-alkene forms only the threo enantiomers.
Thus the addition of hydrogen is a stereospecific reaction
Ñthe product obtained fromaddition to the cis isomer is different from the product obtained from addition to the

trans isomer. It is also a stereoselective reaction because all possible isomers are not

formed; for example,only the threo enantiomers are formed in the following reaction.
Cyclic alkenes with fewer than eight carbons in the ring,such as cyclopentene and
cyclohexene,can exist only in the cis configuration because they do not have enough

carbons to incorporate a trans double bond. Therefore,it is not necessary to use the cis

designation with their names. Both cis and trans isomers are possible for rings con-

taining eight or more carbons,however,so the configuration of the compound must be

specified in its name.
Therefore,the addition of to a cyclic alkene with fewer than eight ring atoms forms
only the cis enantiomers.Each of the two asymmetric carbons in the product of the following reaction is bonded to
the same four substituents. Therefore,syn addition forms a meso compound.
DDH21,2-dideuterio-cyclopentenePt/CDDHHH3CCH(CH3)2H21-isopropyl-2-methyl-cyclopentenePt/CH3CCH(CH3)2H3CCH(CH3)2HHHHH2cis-cyclooctenetrans-cycloocteneH2HHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CCcis-2,3-dideuterio-2-pentenemeso compoundDDPt/CH2DHDHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2DDCCIf you have trouble determining the con-
figuration of a product, make a model.
HHHHH3CDHDCCH3CCH2CH3CH2CH3Dtrans-2,3-dideuterio-2-pentenethreo enantiomersFischer projectionsthreo enantiomersperspective formulas(eclipsed conformers)threo enantiomersperspective formulas(staggered conformers)DPt/CH2CH3HDDHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3DHHDCH2CH3DH3CDHHHDDCH2CH3H3CDDH3CCCCCCCCCBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 224
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
225PROBLEM 43a.What stereoisomers are formed in the following reaction?
b.What stereoisomer is formed in greater yield?
3. Stereochemistry of Hydroboration
ÐOxidationThe addition of borane to an alkene is a concerted reaction. The boron and the hydride
ion add to the two carbons of the double bond at the same time (Section4.9). Be-

cause the two species add simultaneously,they must add to the same side of the dou-

ble bond. So the addition of borane to an alkene,like the addition of hydrogen,is a syn

addition.When the alkylborane is oxidized by reaction with hydrogen peroxide and hydrox-
ide ion,the OH group ends up in the same position as the boron group it replaces. Con-

sequently,the overall hydroboration
Ðoxidation reaction amounts to a syn addition of
water to a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond.Because only syn addition occurs,hydroboration
Ðoxidation is stereoselective
Ñonlytwo of the four possible stereoisomers are formed. As we saw when we looked at the

addition of to a cycloalkene,syn addition results in the formation of only the pair

of enantiomers that has the added groups on the same side of the ring.PROBLEM 44What stereoisomers would be obtained from hydroboration
Ðoxidation of the following
compounds?a.cyclohexenec.1,2-dimethylcyclopentene
b.1-ethylcyclohexened.
cis-2-butene
1. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2, H2OH3CCH3H3CHOHCH3H3CHOHCH3H2HOH2O2H2Oan alkyl boranehydroborationÐoxidation is a syn addition of wateran alcoholHOH
CCHBH
2CCBH3HBH
2CCHBHHCCsyn addition of boraneCCsp2CH3CH2H2Pd/CBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 225
226CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry4. Addition Reactions that Form a Bromonium Ion Intermediate
If two asymmetric carbons are created as the result of an addition reaction that forms a
bromonium ion intermediate,only one pair of enantiomers will be formed. In other

words,the addition of is a stereoselective reaction. The addition of to the cis

alkene forms only the threo enantiomers.
Similarly,the addition of to the trans alkene forms only the erythro enantiomers.
Because the cis and trans isomers form different products,the reaction is stereospecif-

ic as well as stereoselective.
Because the addition of to the cis alkene forms the threo enantiomers,we know
that addition of is an example of anti addition because if syn addition had occurred

to the cis alkene,the erythro enantiomers would have been formed. The addition of
is anti because the reaction intermediate is a cyclic bromonium ion (Section4.7).
Once the bromonium ion is formed,the bridged bromine atom blocks that side of the

ion. As a result,the negatively charged bromide ion must approach from the opposite

side (following either the green arrows 
orthe red arrows). Thus,the two bromine
atoms add to opposite sides of the double bond. Because only anti addition of can

occur,only two of the four possiblestereoisomers are obtained.
Br2Br2Br2Br2HHHBrCCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH2CH3HBrBr
BrCCBr
2H3CCH2CH3Htrans-2-penteneerythro enantiomersFischer projectionserythro enantiomersperspective formulasHCH2Cl2CH3HHBrBrCH2CH3CH3BrH
HBrCH2CH3CCBr2HHHHHBrCCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH2CH3HBrBr
BrCCBr
2H3CCH2CH3Hcis-2-pentenethreo enantiomersFischer projectionsthreo enantiomersperspective formulasHCH2Cl2CH3BrBrCH2CH3CH3BrH
HBr
CH2CH3CCBr2Br2Tutorial:
Review halogenationBrBr
CCBrBrCCBrCCBraddition of Br2 is an anti additionthe BrÕs have added to opposite sides of the double bondBrÐ adds to the side oppositeto where Br+ addedBrBrCCthe bromonium ion formedfrom the reaction of Br2with cis-2-buteneBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 226
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
227PROBLEM 45Reaction of 2-ethyl-1-pentene with with or with followed by
leads to a racemic mixture. Explain why a racemic mixture is obtained in
each case.PROBLEM 46How could you prove,using a sample of 
trans
-2-butene,that addition of forms a cyclic
bromonium ion intermediate rather than a carbocation intermediate?If the two asymmetric carbons in the product each have the same four substituents,
the erythro isomers are identical and constitute a meso compound. Therefore,addition

of to trans
-2-butene forms a meso compound.
Because only anti addition occurs,addition of to a cyclohexene forms only the
enantiomers that have the added bromine atoms on opposite sides of the ring.
One way to determine what stereoisomers are obtained from many reactions that
create a product with two asymmetric carbons is the mnemonic 
CIS-SYN-ERYTHRO
,which is easy to remember because all three terms mean 
Òon the same side.ÓYou can change any two of the terms but you can
Õt change just one. (For example,
TRANS-ANTI-ERYTHRO
,TRANS-SYN-ERYTHREO
,and 
CIS-ANTI-THREOare allowed,but 
TRANS-SYN-ERYTHRO
is not allowed.) So if you have a trans reac-
tant that undergoes addition of (which is anti),the erythro products are obtained.

This mnemonic will work for all reactions that have a product with a structure that can be

described by erythro or threo.A summary of the stereochemistry of the products obtained from addition reactionsto alkenes is given in Table5.2.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Give the configuration of the products obtained from the following reactions:
a.d.
b.e.

c.f.
trans-3-hexene
Br23-methyl-3-hexene
HBrperoxide
trans-3-heptene
Br21-butene
HBrperoxide
cis-3-heptene
Br21-butene
HClBr2HHHBrBrBr2CH2Cl2HHBrBrHBr2HHBrCCH3CH3CHtrans-2-butenea meso compoundperspective formulaBr2CH2Cl2HHBrCCCH3H3CBrCH3CCHCCH3Brplane ofsymmetrya meso compoundFischer projectionCH3HBr
HBr
CH3Br2Br2HOH2O2BH3H2Pt,Br2,BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 227
228CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryTable 5.2Stereochemistry of Alkene Addition Reactions
ReactionType of additionStereoisomers formed
Addition reactions that create one1.If the reactant does not have an asymmetric
asymmetric carbon in the productcarbon,a pair of enantiomers will be obtained 
(equal amounts of the Rand Sisomers).2.If the reactant has an asymmetric carbon,unequal 
amounts of a pair of diastereomers will be obtained.Addition reactions that create two
asymmetric carbons in the productAddition of reagents that form a syn and antiFour stereoisomers can be obtained
acarbocation or radical intermediate(the cis and trans isomers form the same products)
Addition of synciserythro enantiomers
aAddition of boranetransthreo enantiomers
Addition of anticisthreo enantiomers
transerythro enantiomers
aaIf the two asymmetric carbons have the same substituents,a meso compound will be obtained instead of the pair of erythro enanti
omers.Br2H2Start by drawing the product without regard to its configuration,to check whether the
reaction has created any asymmetric carbons. Then determine the configuration of the

products,paying attention to the configuration (if any) of the reactant,how many asym-

metric carbons are formed,and the mechanism of the reaction. Let
Õs start with a.a.The product has one asymmetric carbon,so equal amounts of the 
Rand Senantiomerswill be formed.b.The product does not have an asymmetric carbon,so it has no stereoisomers.
c.Two asymmetric carbons have been created in the product. Because the reaction forms
a radical intermediate,two pairs of enantiomers are formed.
CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3CH3BrCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCCH3CH2ClHCH3CCH2CH3ClHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3ClBrHCCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3HHBrCCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3HBrCH3CCCH3CH2CH2CH3HHHBrCCCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3HorCH2CH3HCH3HBrCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3HBrHCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3HHBrCH2CH3CH2CH3HBrCH3HCH2CH3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 228
Section 5.19Stereochemistry of Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Alkenes
229d.Two asymmetric carbons have been created in the product. Because the reactant is cis
and addition of is anti,the threo enantiomers are formed.
e.Two asymmetric carbons have been created in the product. Because the reactant is trans
and addition of is anti,the erythro enantiomers are formed.
f.Two asymmetric carbons have been created in the product. Because the reactant is trans
and addition of is anti,one would expect the erythro enantiomers. However,the two

asymmetric carbons are bonded to the same four groups,so the erythro product is a

meso compound. Thus,only one stereoisomer is formed.
Now continue on to Problem 47.
PROBLEM 47Give the configuration of the products obtained from the following reactions:
a.d.
b.e.

c.f.
PROBLEM 48When adds to an alkene with different substituents on each of the two carbons,
such as cis-2-heptene,identical amounts of the two threo enantiomers are obtained even
though is more likely to attack the less sterically hindered carbon atom of the bromo-

nium ion. Explain why identical amounts of the stereoisomers are obtained.Brsp2Br21-hexeneBr2()-3-methyl-2-penteneHBrperoxidecis-2-penteneBr2()-3-methyl-2-penteneHBrcis-3-hexeneHBrtrans-2-buteneHBrperoxideCH2CH3HBr
HBr
CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH3HCCBrHBrorBr2CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3BrBrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3HCCBrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3HCCBrHBrHBrorCH2CH3HBr
HBr
CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3BrH
BrH
CH2CH2CH3Br2CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH3BrBrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3HHCCBrBrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3HHCCBrBrorCH2CH3HBr
BrH
CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3BrH
HBr
CH2CH2CH3Br2CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH3BrBrBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 229
230CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistryPROBLEM 49a.What products would be obtained from the addition of to cyclohexene if the solvent
were instead of 
b.Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
PROBLEM 50What stereoisomers would you expect to obtain from each of the following reactions?
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 51a.What is the major product obtained from the reaction of propene and plus
excess
b.Indicate the relative amounts of the stereoisomers obtained.
5.20Stereochemistry of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
The chemistry associated with living organisms is called 
biochemistry. When you
study biochemistry,you study the structures and functions of the molecules found in

the biological world and the reactions involved in the synthesis and degradation of

these molecules. Because the compounds in living organisms are organic compounds,

it is not surprising that many of the reactions encountered in organic chemistry are also

seen when you study the chemistry of biological systems. Living cells do not contain

molecules such as HBr,or so you would not expect to find the addition of

such reagents to alkenes in biological systems. However,living cells do contain water

and acid catalysts,so some alkenes found in biological systems undergo the acid-

catalyzed addition of water (Section4.5).
The organic reactions that occur in biological systems are catalyzed by enzymes.
Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are almost always completely stereoselective. In other

words,enzymes catalyze reactions that form only a single stereoisomer. For example,

the enzyme fumarase,which catalyzes the addition of water to fumarate,forms only

(S)-malateÑthe Renantiomer is not formed.An enzyme-catalyzed reaction forms only one stereoisomer because the binding
site of an enzyme is chiral. The chiral binding site restricts delivery of reagents to only

one side of the functional group of the reactant. Consequently,only one stereoisomer

is formed.H2OHCOOOOCHfumaraseCOOCOOCCH2HOHfumarate(
S)-malateCCBH3,Cl2,Cl?Br2CH2CH3H2Pt/CCH3CH3CH3Br2CH2Cl2CH3CH3H2Pt/CH2Pt/CCH3CH2CH3H3CCH2CH3CCBr2CH2Cl2CH2CH3CH3CCCH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3Br2CH2Cl2CH2Cl2  ?H2OBr2BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 230
Summary231For studies on the stereochemistry of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions,
Sir John
Cornforth
received the Nobel Prize
in chemistry in 1975 (sharing it with

Vladimir Prelog,page188). Born in

Australia in 1917,he studied at the

University of Sydney and received a

Ph.D. from Oxford. His major re-

search was carried out in laborato-

ries at BritainÕs Medical Research
Council and in laboratories at Shell

Research Ltd. He was knighted in

1977.Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are also stereospecific
Ñan enzyme typically catalyzesthe reaction of only one stereoisomer. For example,fumarase catalyzes the addition of

water to fumarate (the trans isomer) but not to maleate (the cis isomer).
An enzyme is able to differentiate between stereoisomeric reactants because of its chi-
ral binding site. The enzyme will bind only the stereoisomer whose substituents are in

the correct positions to interact with substituents in the chiral binding site (Figure5.3).

Other stereoisomers do not have substituents in the proper positions,so they cannot

bind efficiently to the enzyme. An enzyme
Õs stereospecificity can be likened to a right-
handed glove which fits only the right hand.
PROBLEM 52a.What would be the product of the reaction of fumarate and if were used as a
catalyst instead of fumarase?b.What would be the product of the reaction of maleate and if were used as a cat-
alyst instead of fumarase?HH2OHH2OH2OOOCCOOmaleateHfumaraseno reactionHCCFundamental work on the stereo-
chemistry of enzyme-catalyzed reac-

tions was done by Frank H.Westheimer
.Westheimer was born
in Baltimore in 1912 and received his

graduate training at Harvard Univer-

sity. He served on the faculty of the

University of Chicago and subse-

quently returned to Harvard as a pro-

fessor of chemistry.
SummaryStereochemistry
is the field of chemistry that deals with the
structures of molecules in three dimensions. Compounds
that have the same molecular formula but are not identical

are called isomers; they fall into two classes:constitutional
isomers and stereoisomers. Constitutional isomersdiffer in
the way their atoms are connected. 
Stereoisomers
differ in
the way their atoms are arranged in space. There are two

kinds of stereoisomers:cisÐtrans isomersand isomers thatcontain chirality centers.A chiralmolecule has a nonsuperimposable mirror
image. An 
achiralmolecule has a superimposable mirror
image. The feature that is most often the cause of chirality

is an asymmetric carbon. An 
asymmetric carbonis a car-bon bonded to four different atoms or groups. An asymmet-

ric carbon is also known as a 
chirality center
. Nitrogen and
phosphorus atoms can also be chirality centers. Nonsuper-

imposable mirror-image molecules are called 
enantiomers.Diastereomers
are stereoisomers that are not enantiomers.Enantiomers have identical physical and chemical proper-

ties; diastereomers have different physical and chemical

properties. An achiral reagent reacts identically with both

enantiomers; a chiral reagent reacts differently with each

enantiomer. A mixture of equal amounts of two enan-

tiomers is called a racemic mixture
.A stereocenter
is an atom at which the interchange of
two groups produces a stereoisomer:asymmetric carbons
Ñwhere the interchange of two groups produces an enan-

tiomerÑand the carbons where the interchange of two
groups converts a cis isomer to a trans isomer (or an 
Eiso-mer to a Zisomer)Ñare stereocenters. The letters 
Rand Sindicate the configuration
about an asymmetric carbon. If
one molecule has the Rand the other has the Sconfigura-
tion,they are enantiomers; if they both have the 
Ror both
have the 
Sconfiguration,they are identical.
Chiral compounds are 
optically active
Ñthey rotate the
plane of polarized light; achiral compounds are 
opticallyinactive
. If one enantiomer rotates the plane of polarizationclockwise its mirror image will rotate the plane of po-

larization the same amount counterclockwise Each op-

tically active compound has a characteristic 
specific
rotation
. A racemic mixture
is optically inactive. A 
mesocompoundhas two or more asymmetric carbons and a
plane of symmetry; it is an achiral molecule. A compound

with the same four groups bonded to two different asym-

metric carbons will have three stereoisomers,a meso com-

pound and a pair of enantiomers. If a reaction does not
break any bonds to the asymmetric carbon,the reactant and

product will have the same 
relative configuration
Ñtheirsubstituents will have the same relative positions. The

absolute configuration
is the actual configuration. If a re-
action does break a bond to the asymmetric carbon,the con-

figuration of the product will depend on the mechanism of

the reaction.A regioselective
reaction selects for a particular consti-tutional isomer; a stereoselective
reaction selects for aparticular stereoisomer. A reaction is 
stereospecific
if thereactant can exist as stereoisomers and each stereoisomer-

ic reactant leads to a different stereoisomeric product or a
().(),BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 231
232CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistrydifferent set of stereoisomeric products. When a reactant
that does not have an asymmetric carbon forms a product

with one asymmetric carbon,the product will be a racemic

mixture.In syn additionthe two substituents add to the same side
of the double bond; in 
anti additionthey add to opposite
sides of the double bond. Both syn and anti addition occur
in electrophilic addition reactions that take place by way of
a carbocation or a radical intermediate. Addition of to an

alkene is a syn addition reaction. Hydroboration
Ðoxidationis overall a syn addition of water. Addition of is an anti

addition reaction. An enzyme-catalyzed reaction forms

only one stereoisomer; an enzyme typically catalyzes the
reaction of only one stereoisomer.
Br2H2Key Terms
absolute configuration (p.209)
achiral (p.184)

amine inversion (p.217)

anti addition (p.222)

asymmetric carbon (p.184)

biochemistry (p.230)

chiral (p.184)

chiral catalyst (p.213)

chiral probe (p.213)

chirality center (p.185)

cis isomer (p.183)

cisÐtrans isomers (p.182)
chromatography (p.213)

configuration (p.188)

configurational isomers (p.182)

constitutional isomers (p.182)

dextrorotatory (p.193)

diastereomer (p.197)

diastereotopic hydrogens (p.216)

enantiomer (p.186)
enantiomerically pure (p.195)
enantiomeric excess (ee) (p.196)

enantiotopic hydrogens (p.215)

enzyme (p.213)

erythro enantiomers (p.198)

Fischer projection (p.187)

geometric isomers (p.183)

isomers (p.182)

levorotatory (p.193)

meso compound (p.201)

observed rotation (p.194)

optical purity (op) (p.195)

optically active (p.193)

optically inactive (p.193)

perspective formula (p.186)

plane of symmetry (p.201)

plane-polarized light (p.192)

polarimeter (p.193)

prochiral carbon (p.216)

pro-Rhydrogen (p.216)
pro-Shydrogen (p.216)
racemate (p.195)

racemic mixture (p.195)

Rconfiguration (p.188)
regioselective (p.218)

relative configuration (p.209)

resolution of a racemic mixture (p.212)

Sconfiguration (p.188)
specific rotation (p.194)

stereocenter (p.187)

stereochemistry (p.218)

stereoisomers (p.182)

stereoselective (p.218)

stereospecific (p.219)

syn addition (p.222)

threo enantiomers (p.198)

trans isomer (p.183)
Problems
53.Neglecting stereoisomers,give the structures of all compounds with molecular formula Which ones can exist as
stereoisomers?54.Draw all possible stereoisomers for each of the following compounds. State if no stereoisomers are possible.
a.1-bromo-2-chlorocyclohexaneg.1,2-dimethylcyclopropane

b.2-bromo-4-methylpentaneh.4-bromo-2-pentene

c.1,2-dichlorocyclohexanei.3,3-dimethylpentane

d.2-bromo-4-chloropentanej.3-chloro-1-butene

e.3-heptenek.1-bromo-2-chlorocyclobutane

f.1-bromo-4-chlorocyclohexanel.1-bromo-3-chlorocyclobutane
55.Name each of the following compounds using 
R,Sand E,Z(Section3.5) designations where necessary:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
BrCH
2CH2CH2CH2CHCH3BrCH3CH3CCCCCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3H3CCH2CH2ClCH3CCFIClBrBrHCCFClBrCH3CCH
2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3HC5H10.BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 232
Problems233g.h.
56.Mevacor
¨is used clinically to lower serum cholesterol levels. How many asymmetric carbons does Mevacor
¨have?
57.Indicate whether each of the following pairs of compounds are identical or are enantiomers,diastereomers,or constitutional
isomers:a.i.
b.j.
c.k.
d.l.
e.m.
f.n.
g.o.
h.p.
ClClandClClCHCH3andCH3CH2CH2ClCHCH2ClCH3CH2CH3CCHand
ClHCH3CH3CH2CH3CCCH3HClHCH2CH3CH3CH2OHHandCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2OHHCH3CH3andH3CCH3CH3H3CandCH2CH3CH3BrandH3CH3CHHCH3CH3CCBrCCCCandH3CHHCH3H3CBrCH3BrCCCCCH3HOH
andHCl
CH3CH3HOH
ClH
CH3CH2CH3HOH
andHCl
CH3CH3HOH
HCl
CH2CH3CH3CH3HandCH3H3CHHHBrHHBrandHBrH
BrandH
BrHHBrBr
HBrHCl
andClH
ClH
HCl
HCl
andClH
HHClCl
HCland

HCl
HHClCl
MevacorCH3OHOOOOCH3H3CCH2CH3HOH
HCl
CH3CH2CH2CH2OHHOCH
3CH2OHBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 233
234CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry58.a.Give the product(s) that would be obtained from the reaction of 
cis-2-butene and 
trans
-2-butene with each of the following
reagents. If the products can exist as stereoisomers,show which stereoisomers are obtained.
1.HCl5.

2.followed by 6.

3.7.

4.in 8.
b.With which reagents do the two alkenes react to give different products?
59.Which of the following compounds have an achiral stereoisomer?
a.2,3-dichlorobutanef.2,4-dibromopentane

b.2,3-dichloropentaneg.2,3-dibromopentane

c.2,3-dichloro-2,3-dimethylbutaneh.1,4-dimethylcyclohexane

d.1,3-dichlorocyclopentanei.1,2-dimethylcyclopentane

e.1,3-dibromocyclobutanej.1,2-dimethylcyclobutane
60.Give the products and their configurations obtained from the reaction of 1-ethylcyclohexene with the following reagents:
a.HBrd.followed by 

b.e.

c.61.Citrate synthase,one of the enzymes in the series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions known as the Krebs cycle,catalyzes the synth
esisof citric acid from oxaloacetic acid and acetyl-CoA. If the synthesis is carried out with acetyl-CoA that has radioactive carbo
nin the indicated position,the isomer shown here is obtained.
a.Which stereoisomer of citric acid is synthesized,
Ror S?b.Why is the other stereoisomer not obtained?

c.If the acetyl-CoA used in the synthesis does not contain will the product of the reaction be chiral or achiral?
62.Give the products of the following reactions. If the products can exist as stereoisomers,show which stereoisomers are obtain
ed.a.f.

b.g.

c.h.

d.i.

e.j.
63.The specific rotation of (
R)--glyceraldehyde is If the observed specific rotation of a mixture of (
R)-glyceraldehyde and(S)-glyceraldehyde is what percent of glyceraldehyde is present as the 
Renantiomer?64.Indicate whether each of the following structures is (
R)-2-chlorobutane or (
S)-2-chlorobutane. (Use models,if necessary.)
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
65.A solution of an unknown compound (3.0g of the compound in 20mL of solution),when placed in a polarimeter tube 2.0dm
long,was found to rotate the plane of polarized light 1.8
¡in a counterclockwise direction. What is the specific rotation of the
compound?ClCCH3HClCH
2CH3HHCH3CH3HHClClCH3HCl
CH2CH3HHClHH3CHCH31.4¡,8.7¡.()PtC1-chloro-2-ethylcyclohexeneH2,1,2-dimethylcyclohexeneHClPtC()-3,4-dimethyl-3-hepteneH2,1,2-diethylcyclohexeneH3OPtC()-3,4-dimethyl-3-hepteneH2,1-ethylcyclohexeneH3O3,3-dimethyl-1-penteneBr2CH2Cl2trans-2-penteneHClPtC1,2-dideuteriocyclohexeneH2,cis-2-penteneHCl14C,CH2COOHCH2COOH14COOHCCH3CSCoA14HOcitrate synthaseOHOOCCH2CCOOHOoxaloacetic acidacetyl-CoA
citric acid(14C)PtCH2,Br2CH2Cl2HBrperoxideH2O2HO,BH3THFHClCH3OHCH2Cl2Br2HClH2OHBrperoxideH2PtCH2O2HO,BH3THFBr2H2OBRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 234
Problems23566.Butaclamol is a potent antipsychotic that has been used clinically in the treatment of schizophrenia. How many asymmetric
carbons does Butaclamol¨have?
67.Which of the following objects are chiral?
a.a mug with DAD written on one sidee.an automobile

b.a mug with MOM written on one sidef.a wineglass

c.a mug with DAD written opposite the handleg.a nail

d.a mug with MOM written opposite the handleh.a screw
68.Explain how 
Rand Sare related to and 
69.Give the products of the following reactions. If the products can exist as stereoisomers,show which stereoisomers are obtain
ed.a.g.

b.h.

c.i.

d.j.

e.k.

f.l.
70.a.Draw all possible stereoisomers for the following compound.
b.Which isomers are optically inactive (will not rotate plane-polarized light)?
71.Indicate the configuration of the asymmetric carbons in the following molecules:
a.b.c.
72.a.Draw all the isomers with molecular formula that contain a cyclobutane ring. (
Hint:There are seven.)
b.Name the compounds without specifying the configuration of any asymmetric carbons.

c.Identify:
1.constitutional isomers5.achiral compounds

2.stereoisomers6.meso compounds

3.cis
Ðtrans isomers7.enantiomers
4.chiral compounds8.diastereomers
73.A compound has a specific rotation of A solution of the compound has an observed rotation of 
when placed in a polarimeter tube 10cm long. What is the percent of each enantiomer in the solution?
74.Draw structures for each of the following molecules:
a.(
S)-1-bromo-1-chlorobutaned.a chiral isomer of 1,2-dibromocyclobutane
b.(2
R,3R)-2,3-dichloropentanee.two achiral isomers of 3,4,5-trimethylheptane
c.an achiral isomer of 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane
6.52¡(0.187 gmL)39.0¡.C6H12H3CCH2CH3BrBrCCHHBrOCHCCOHHOHHCH2CH2CH3CH2CH2BrHCBrOHHOCH2CHCHCH
2OHCHOHOHPtC()-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexeneH2,cis-3-hexeneBr2CH2Cl2PtC()-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexeneH2,trans-3-hexeneBr2CH2Cl2PtC()-2,3-dichloro-2-buteneH2,1-buteneHBrperoxidePtC()-2,3-dichloro-2-buteneH2,1-buteneHClcis-2-buteneHBrperoxidetrans-2-penteneBr2CH2Cl23,3-dimethyl-1-penteneHBrcis-2-penteneBr2CH2Cl2().()OHHNHButaclamolC(CH3)3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 235
236CHAPTER 5St
ereochemistry75.The enantiomers of 1,2-dimethylaziridine can be separated even though one of the 
ÒgroupsÓattached to nitrogen is a lone pair.
Explain.76.Of the possible monobromination products shown for the following reaction,circle any that would not be formed.

77.A sample of (
S)--lactic acid was found to have an optical purity of 72%. How much 
Risomer is present in the sample?78.Is the following compound optically active?
79.Give the products of the following reactions and their configurations:
80.a.Using the wedge-and-dash notation,draw the nine stereoisomers of 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane.
b.From the nine stereoisomers,identify one pair of enantiomers.

c.Draw the most stable conformation of the most stable stereoisomer.
81.Sherry O. Eismer decided that the configuration of the asymmetric carbons in a sugar such as 
D-glucose could be determinedrapidly by simply assigning the Rconfiguration to an asymmetric carbon with an OH group on the right and the 
Sconfiguration to
an asymmetric carbon with an OH group on the left. Is she correct? (We will see in Chapter22that the 
ÒDÓin D-glucose means theOH group on the bottommost asymmetric carbon is on the right.)82.Cyclohexene exists only in the cis form,while cyclodecene exists in both the cis and trans forms. Explain. (
Hint:Molecularmodels are helpful for this problem.)83.When fumarate reacts with in the presence of the enzyme fumarase,only one isomer of the product is formed. Its structure is
shown. Is the enzyme catalyzing a syn or an anti addition of 
D2OOOCfumarateCOOfumaraseCOOCOODOH
DHHCCD2O?D2OD-glucoseCH2OHHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
OHCHCH3H3CCH(CH3)2HBrHBrperoxideH2PtBr2, CH3OHH, H2OBr2, CH2Cl2Br2, H2O1. BH3/THF2. H2O2, HOCCHClClBrBrHHH()CH2CH3HBrBr
2HBr300 CCH2CH3CH3BrH
HBr
CH2CH3CH3BrH
HBr
CH2CH3CH3HBr
HBr
CH2CH3NHHenantiomers of 1,2-dimethylaziridineCH3CH3NCH3CH3BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 236
Problems23784.Two stereoisomers are obtained from the reaction of HBr with (
S)-4-bromo-1-pentene. One of the stereoisomers is optically active,
and the other is not. Give the structures of the stereoisomers,indicating their absolute configurations,and explain the differe
nce inoptical properties.85.When (
S)--1-chloro-2-methylbutane reacts with chlorine,one of the products formed is -1,4-dichloro-2-methylbutane. Does
this product have the 
Ror the Sconfiguration?
86.Indicate the configuration of the asymmetric carbons in the following molecules:
a.b.c.
87.a.Draw the two chair conformers for each of the stereoisomers of 
trans
-1-tert-butyl-3-methylcyclohexane.
b.For each pair,indicate which conformer is more stable.
88.a.Do the following compounds have any asymmetric carbons?
1.2.
b.Are they chiral? (
Hint:Make models.)
CH3CHCCHCH3CH2CCH2OHHHBrCH3OOCH2CH3CH3()()BRUI05-182_237r4  20-03-2003  3:36 PM  Page 237
2,2-dichlorobutane
1-butyne2HCI
Alkynes
are hydrocarbonsthat contain a carbonÐcarbon

triple bond. Because of its
triple bond,an alkyne has four fewer

hydrogens than the corresponding alkane. Therefore,the general molecular formula

for an acyclic (noncyclic) alkyne is and that for a cyclic alkyne is 
There are only a few naturally occurring alkynes. Examples include capillin,which
has fungicidal activity,and ichthyothereol,a convulsant used by the Amazon Indians

for poisoned arrowheads. A class of naturally occurring compounds called enediynes

has been found to have powerful antibiotic and anticancer properties. These com-

pounds all have a nine- or ten-membered ring that contains two triple bonds separated

by a double bond. Some enediynes are currently in clinical trials.A few drugs contain alkyne functional groups,but they are not naturally occurring
compounds. They exist only because chemists have been able to synthesize them. Their

trade names are shown in green. Trade names are always capitalized and can be used for

commercial purposes only by the owner of the registered trademark (Section30.1).
CH24.CH22,2386Reactions of Alkynes ¥Introduction to 
Multistep SynthesisOCparsalmidean analgesicParsalSinovialNorquenOvastolNH(CH2)3CH3CHH2NOCH2CCH3mestranola component in oral contraceptivesCH3OH3COHpargylinean antihypertensiveEudatinSupirdylCHCHCCH2NCH2COCH3CCCCcapillinCCH3CCCCichthyothereolCCCCOHHOHR4R5R1R2R3an enediyneBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 238
Acetylene ,the common name for the smallest alkyne,may be a famil-
iar word because of the oxyacetylene torch used in welding. Acetylene is supplied to

the torch from one high-pressure gas tank,and oxygen is supplied from another. Burn-

ing acetylene produces a high-temperature flame capable of melting and vaporizing

iron and steel.PROBLEM 1What is the molecular formula for a cyclic alkyne with 14 carbons and two triple bonds?
6.1Nomenclature of Alkynes
The systematic name of an alkyne is obtained by replacing the 
ÒaneÓending of the
alkane name with Òyne.ÓAnalogous to the way compounds with other functional
groups are named,the longest continuous chain containing the carbon
Ðcarbon triplebond is numbered in the direction that gives the alkyne functional group suffix as low

a number as possible. If the triple bond is at the end of the chain,the alkyne is classi-

fied as a 
terminal alkyne
. Alkynes with triple bonds located elsewhere along the
chain are called internal alkynes
. For example,1-butyne is a terminal alkyne,where-
as 2-pentyne is an internal alkyne.
\In common nomenclature,alkynes are named as 
substituted acetylenes. The com-
mon name is obtained by citing the names of the alkyl groups,in alphabetical order,

that have replaced the hydrogens of acetylene. Acetylene is an unfortunate common

name for the smallest alkyne because its 
ÒeneÓending is characteristic of a double
bond rather than a triple bond.If the same number for the alkyne functional group suffix is obtained counting from
either direction along the carbon chain,the correct systematic name is the one that

contains the lowest substituent number. If the compound contains more than one sub-

stituent,the substituents are listed in alphabetical order.
The triple-bond-containing propargyl group is used in common nomenclature. It is
analogous to the double-bond-containing allyl group that you saw in Section3.2.
PROBLEM 2Draw the structure for each of the following compounds.
a.1-chloro-3-hexyned.propargyl chloride
b.cyclooctynee.4,4-dimethyl-1-pentyne

c.isopropylacetylenef.dimethylacetylene
propargyl groupCCH2HCallyl groupCHCH2H2Cpropargyl bromideCCH2BrHCallyl alcoholCHCH2OHH2C3-bromo-2-chloro-4-octynenot 6-bromo-7-chloro-4-octynebecause 2 < 6CCH2CH2CH3BrClCH3CHCHC12345678
1-bromo-5-methyl-3-hexynenot 6-bromo-2-methyl-3-hexynebecause 1 < 2CCH2CH2BrCH3CH3CHC123456(HCCH)1-hexynea terminal alkyne3-hexynean internal alkyneSection 6.1Nomenclature of Alkynes
2393-D Molecules:1-Hexyne; 3-HexyneA substituent receives the lowest
possible number only if there is no

functional group suffix or if the same

number for the functional group suffix

is obtained in both directions.
ethyneacetyleneSystematic:Common:CHHC1-butyneethylacetylenea terminal alkyneCHCH3CH2C4321
2-pentyneethylmethylacetylenean internal alkyneCCH2CH3CH3C123
454-methyl-2-hexynesec-butylmethyl-acetyleneCCH3CH2CH3CH3CHC564321BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 239
PROBLEM 3Draw the structures and give the common and systematic names for the seven alkynes with
molecular formula PROBLEM 4Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.c.

b.d.
PROBLEM 5Which would you expect to be more stable,an internal alkyne or a terminal alkyne? Why?
6.2Physical Properties of
Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
All hydrocarbons have similar physical properties. In other words,alkenes and
alkynes have physical properties similar to those of alkanes (Section2.9). All are in-

soluble in water and all are soluble in solvents with low polarity such as benzene and

ether. They are less dense than water and,like other homologous series,have boiling

points that increase with increasing molecular weight (Table6.1). Alkynes are more

linear than alkenes,and a triple bond is more polarizable than a double bond

(Section2.9). These two features cause alkynes to have stronger van der Waals inter-

actions. As a result,an alkyne has a higher boiling point than an alkene containing the

same number of carbon atoms.Internal alkenes have higher boiling points than terminal alkenes. Similarly,inter-
nal alkynes have higher boiling points than terminal alkynes. Notice that the boiling

point of 
cis-2-butene is slightly higher than that of 
trans
-2-butene because the cis iso-
mer has a small dipole moment,whereas the dipole moment of the trans isomer is zero

(Section3.4).
CHCH3CH2CHCCH2CH2CH3CCH2CHCH3CH3CH2CHCBrClCCH2CH3CH3OCH2CCCH3BrCH2CH2CC6H12.240CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisTable 6.1Boiling Points of the Smallest Hydrocarbons
bp (¡C)bp (¡C)bp (¡C)
ethaneetheneethyne
propanepropenepropyne
8butane1-butene1-butyne
36.13039
pentane1-pentene1-pentyne
68.763.571
hexane1-hexene1-hexyne
3.727
cis-2-butene2-butyne
0.955
trans-2-butene2-pentyne
CH3CH2CCCH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CCCH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CCHCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH3(CH2)4CH3CH3CH2CH2CCHCH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH3(CH2)3CH3CH3CH2CCH6.5CH3CH2CHCH20.5CH3CH2CH2CH323CH3CCH47CH3CHCH242.1CH3CH2CH384HCCH104H2CCH288.6CH3CH3BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 240
PROBLEM 6What orbitals are used to form the carbon
Ðcarbon bond between the highlighted carbons?
6.4How Alkynes ReactWith a cloud of electrons completely surrounding the bond,an alkyne is an electron-
rich molecule. In other words,it is a nucleophile and consequently it will react with

electrophiles. For example,if a reagent such as HCl is added to an alkyne,the rela-

tively weak bond will break because the electrons are attracted to the electrophilic
ppsCHCH3a.  CH3CHCHCH3b.  CH3CHC     CH
2c.  CH3CHCCH3d.  CH3CCCH3e.  CH3CCHCHCH2f.  CH2CHCH2CH3g.  CH3CHCCH2CH3h.  CH3CCHCCHi.  CH2sSection 6.4How Alkynes React
2413-D Molecule:Ethyne6.3The Structure of Alkynes
The structure of ethyne was discussed in Section1.9. Each carbon is 
sphybridized,so
each has two 
sporbitals and two 
porbitals. One sporbital overlaps the 
sorbital of ahydrogen,and the other overlaps an 
sporbital of the other carbon. Because the 
spor-bitals are oriented as far from each other as possible to minimize electron repulsion,

ethyne is a linear molecule with bond angles of 180¡(Section1.9).
The two remaining 
porbitals on each carbon are oriented at right angles to one
another and to the 
sporbitals (Figure6.1). Each of the two 
porbitals on one carbon
overlaps the parallel 
porbital on the other carbon to form two bonds. One pair of
overlapping 
porbitals results in a cloud of electrons above and below the bond,and
the other pair results in a cloud of electrons in front of and behind the bond. The

electrostatic potential map of ethyne shows that the end result can be thought of as a

cylinder of electrons wrapped around the bond.
ssspCHHC180180    bond formed by
spÐs overlap    bond formed by
spÐsp overlapCCHHA triple bond is composed of a bond
and two bonds.
PSCCHHCCHHa.b.
Figure 6.1
(a)Each of the two bonds of a
triple bond is formed by side-to-side
overlap of a porbital of one carbonwith a parallel porbital of theadjacent carbon.
(b)A triple bond consists of a 

bond formed by spÐspoverlap(yellow) and two bonds formed

by pÐpoverlap (blue and purple).pspWe have seen that a carbon
Ðcarbon triple bond is shorter and stronger than a
carbonÐcarbon double bond,which in turn,is shorter and stronger than a carbon
Ðcarbonsingle bond. We have also seen that a carbon
Ðcarbon bond is weaker than a
carbonÐcarbon bond (Section1.14). The relatively weak bonds allow alkynes to
react easily. Like alkenes,alkynes are stabilized by electron-donating alkyl groups. In-

ternal alkynes,therefore,are more stable than terminal alkynes. We now have seen that

alkyl groups stabilize alkenes,alkynes,carbocations,
andalkyl radicals.
pspBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 241
PROBLEM 7Under what circumstances can you assume that the less stable reactant will be the more
reactive reactant?
Why is the transition state for the first step of an electrophilic addition reaction for
an alkyne less stable than that for an alkene? The Hammond postulate predicts that the

structure of the transition state will resemble the structure of the intermediate

(Section4.3). The intermediate formed when a proton adds to an alkyne is a vinylic
242CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisFree energyProgress of the reactionGàalkynealkenevinyliccationalkynealkenealkyl cationGàan alkyne is less reactive than an alkenean alkyne is less 
stable than an alkeneFigure 6.2
Comparison of the free energies ofactivation for the addition of an
electrophile to an alkyne and to an
alkene. Because an alkyne is less
reactive than an alkene toward
electrophilic addition, we know
that for the reaction of an

alkyne is greater than the for

the reaction of an alkene.GàGàproton. In the second step of the reaction,the positively charged carbocation interme-
diate reacts rapidly with the negatively charged chloride ion.
Thus alkynes,like alkenes,undergo electrophilic addition reactions. We will see
that the same electrophilic reagents that add to alkenes also add to alkynes and that
Ñagain like alkenes
Ñelectrophilic addition to a 
terminalalkyne is regioselective:When
an electrophile adds to a terminal alkyne,it adds to the 
spcarbon that is bonded to thehydrogen. The addition reactions of alkynes,however,have a feature that alkenes do

not have:Because the product of the addition of an electrophilic reagent to an alkyne

is an alkene,a second electrophilic addition reaction can occur.
An alkyne is 
lessreactive than an alkene. This might at first seem surprising because
an alkyne is less stable than an alkene (Figure6.2). However,reactivity depends on
which in turn depends on the stability of the reactant 
andthe stability of the tran-sition state (Section3.7). For an alkyne to be both less stable and less reactive than an

alkene,two conditions must hold:The transition state for the first step (the rate-limiting

step) of an electrophilic addition reaction for an alkyne must be less stable than the tran-

sition state for the first step of an electrophilic addition reaction for an alkene,
andthedifference in the stabilities of the transition states must be greater than the difference in

the stabilities of the reactants so that (Figure6.2).
alkyneàalkeneàà,CCH3CH3CCH
3CCH2CH3CHCH3CH3CClClClHClHCla second electrophilicaddition reaction occursCCH3ClHCH3CCHCH
3CH3CCHCH3ClCH3CClAlkynes are less reactive than alkenes in
electrophilic addition reactions.
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 242
Section 6.5Addition of Hydrogen Halides and Addition of Halogens
2433-D Molecule:Vinylic cation
Tutorial:
Addition of HCl to an alkyneThe electrophile adds to the 
spcarbonof a terminal alkyne that is bonded to
the hydrogen.
*One equivalent means the same number of moles as the other reactant.
cation,whereas the intermediate formed when a proton adds to an alkene is an alkyl
cation. A 
vinylic cationhas a positive charge on a vinylic carbon. A vinylic cation is
less stable than a similarly substituted alkyl cation. In other words,a primary vinylic

cation is less stable than a primary alkyl cation,and a secondary vinylic cation is less

stable than a secondary alkyl cation.
A vinylic cation is less stable because the positive charge is on an 
spcarbon,which
we will see is more electronegative than the carbon of an alkyl cation

(Section6.9). Therefore,a vinylic cation is less able to bear a positive charge. In addi-

tion,hyperconjugation is less effective in stabilizing the charge on a vinylic cation

than on an alkyl cation (Section4.2).
6.5Addition of Hydrogen Halides 
and Addition of HalogensWe have just seen that an alkyne is a nucleophile and that in the first step of the reac-
tion of an alkyne with a hydrogen halide,the electrophilic adds to the alkyne. If the

alkyne is a 
terminalalkyne,the will add to the 
spcarbon bonded to the hydrogen,
because the secondary vinylic cation that results is more stable than the primary

vinylic cation that would be formed if the added to the other 
spcarbon. (Recall thatalkyl groups stabilize positively charged carbon atoms; Section4.2).
Although the addition of a hydrogen halide to an alkyne can generally be
stopped after the addition of one equivalent*of hydrogen halide,a second addition

reaction will take place if excess hydrogen halide is present. The product of the sec-

ond addition reaction is a geminal dihalide,a molecule with two halogens on the
same carbon. ÒGeminalÓcomes from geminus
,which is Latin for 
Òtwin.ÓCH2HBrCH3CH2CCH
3CH2CCH3BrBr2,2-dibromobutanea geminal dihalide2-bromo-1-buteneBrelectrophile adds hereCHCH3CH2CCH
3CH2CCHCH
3CH2CCH
2-bromo-1-butene
a halo-substituted alkene1-butyneCH2CH3CH2Ca secondary vinylic cationHBrCHCH3CH2CHa primary vinylic cationBrBrHHHHHsp2RRCRa tertiarycarbocationRRRCHR
CCHa secondarycarbocationHRCHa secondaryvinylic cationHHCHa primarycarbocationa primaryvinylic cationthe methylcationRCHH
Crelative stabilities of carbocations
least stablemost stableBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 243
244CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisWhen the second equivalent of hydrogen halide adds to the double bond,the elec-
trophile adds to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens
Ñaspredicted by the rule that governs electrophilic addition reactions (Section4.4). The

carbocation that results is more stable than the carbocation that would have been

formed if had added to the other carbon because bromine can share the positive

charge with carbon by sharing one of its lone pairs (Section1.19).
The addition of a hydrogen halide to an alkyne can be stopped after the addition
of one equivalent of HBr or HCl because an alkyne is more reactive than the halo-

substituted alkene that is the product of the first addition reaction. The halogen sub-

stituent withdraws electrons inductively (through the bond),thereby decreasing

the nucleophilic character of the double bond.In describing the mechanism for addition of a hydrogen halide,we have shown that
the intermediate is a vinylic cation. This mechanism may not be completely correct. A

secondary vinylic cation is about as stable as a primary carbocation,and generally pri-

mary carbocations are too unstable to be formed. Some chemists,therefore,think that

a pi-complex
rather than a vinylic cation is formed as an intermediate.
Support for the intermediateÕs being a pi-complex comes from the observation that
many (but not all) alkyne addition reactions are stereoselective. For example,the addi-

tion of HCl to 2-butyne forms only (
Z)-2-chloro-2-butene,which means that only anti
addition of H and Cl occurs. Clearly,the nature of the intermediate in alkyne addition

reactions is not completely understood.Addition of a hydrogen halide to an 
internalalkyne forms two geminal dihalides
because the initial addition of the proton can occur with equal ease to either of the 
spcarbons.If,however,the same group is attached to each of the 
spcarbons of the internal alkyne,
only one geminal dihalide is obtained.2,2-dichloropentane3,3-dichloropentane
2-pentyneexcessCCH3HClCH3CH2CCH3CH2CH2CCH3ClClCH3CH2CCH2CH3ClClCCH3CH3C(Z)-2-chloro-2-butene2-butyneHClH3CCH3CCClHHClHCCH
a pi-complexsCH3CH3CH2Ccarbocation formed by adding the electrophile to the sp2carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogensbromine shares a lone pairwith carbonBrCH3CH3CH2CBrsp2Hsp2(H)3-D Molecule:Pi-complexBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 244
An alkyl peroxide has the same effect on the addition of HBr to an alkyne that it has
on the addition of HBr to an alkene (Section4.10)
Ñit reverses the order of addition
because the peroxide causes to become the electrophile.
The mechanism of the reaction is the same as that for the addition of HBr to an alkene
in the presence of a peroxide. That is,the peroxide is a radical initiator and creates a

bromine radical (an electrophile). If the alkyne is a terminal alkyne,the bromine radical

adds to the 
spcarbon bonded to the hydrogen; if it is an internal alkyne,the bromide
radical can add with equal easeto either of the 
spcarbons. The resulting vinylic radical
abstracts a hydrogen atom from HBr and regenerates the bromine radical. Any two

radicals can combine in a termination step.The halogens and also add to alkynes. In the presence of excess halogen,a
second addition reaction occurs. Typically the solvent is 
PROBLEM 8Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
CH3CCCH
2CH3excessHBrHCCCH
3excessHBrCH3CCCH
3excessHBrHCCCH
3HBrCH3CCCH
3Br2CH2Cl2HCCCH
3HBrperoxideCH3CH2CCCH
3Cl2CH2Cl2Cl2CH2Cl2ClClClClClClCH3CH2CCCH
3CH3CH2CCCH
3CH3CCH
Br2CH2Cl2Br2CH2Cl2BrBrBrBrBrBrCH3CCH
CH3CCH
CH2Cl2.Br2Cl2ORRO2 ROBrROH
BrBrRO     H
BrCH3CH2CCH
CH3CH2CCH
BrBr
CH3CH2CCHH
BrCH3CH2CCHBr
mechanism for the addition of HBr in the presence of a peroxide
HCHBrCH3CH2CHHBrperoxideCH1-butyneCH3CH2C1-bromo-1-buteneBrCCH2CH3HBrCH3CH2CCH
3CH2CH2CCH2CH3BrBr3,3-dibromohexane3-hexyneexcessSection 6.5Addition of Hydrogen Halides and Addition of Halogens
245BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 245
246CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisPROBLEM 9From what you know about the stereochemistry of alkene addition reactions,predict the
configurations of the products that would be obtained from the reaction of 2-butyne with

the following:
a.one equivalent of in b.one equivalent of 
6.6Addition of Water
In Section4.5,we saw that alkenes undergo the acid-catalyzed addition of water. The
product of the reaction is an alcohol.Alkynes also undergo the acid-catalyzed addition of water. The product of the reaction
is an enol. An enolhas a carbonÐcarbon double bond and an OH group bonded to oneof the carbons. (The ending 
ÒeneÓsignifies the double bond,and 
ÒolÓthe OH.When the two endings are joined,the final e of 
ÒeneÓis dropped to avoid two consec-
utive vowels,but it is pronounced as if the 
ewere there,Òene-ol.Ó)The enol immediately rearranges to a 
ketone
. A carbon doubly bonded to an oxygen is
called a carbonyl (Òcar-bo-nil
Ó)group
. A ketone
is a compound that has two alkyl
groups bonded to a carbonyl group. An 
aldehyde
is a compound that has at least onehydrogen bonded to a carbonyl group.
Aketone and an enol differ only in the location of a double bond and a hydrogen.
Such isomers are called tautomers(Òtaw-toe-mers
Ó). The ketone and enol are called
ketoÐenol tautomers
. Interconversion of the tautomers is called 
tautomerization. We
will examine the mechanism of this reaction in Chapter19. For now,the important

thing to remember is that the keto and enol tautomers come to equilibrium in solution,

and the keto tautomer,because it is usually much more stable than the enol tautomer,

predominates at equilibrium.Addition of water to an internal alkyne that has the same group attached to each
of the 
spcarbons forms a single ketone as a product. But if the two groups are not
ORCH2Cketo tautomertautomerizationROHRCHC
enol tautomerROCa carbonyl groupOCRRa ketoneOCRHan aldehydeCH3CCCH
3H2OH2SO4OHOCH3CCHCH
3CH3CCH
2CH3a ketonean enolsp2CH3CH2CH    CH
2CH3CH2CHCH
2H2OH2SO4OHH2-butanol1-buteneHBrperoxideCH2Cl2Br2BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 246
identical,two ketones are formed because the initial addition of the proton can occur
to either of the spcarbons.Terminal alkynes are less reactive than internal alkynes toward the addition of
water. Terminal alkynes will add water if mercuric ion is added to the acidic

mixture. The mercuric ion acts as a catalyst to increase the rate of the addition

reaction.The first step in the mercuric-ion-catalyzed hydration of an alkyne is formation of a
cyclic mercurinium ion. (Two of the electrons in mercury
Õs filled 5
datomic orbital areshown.) This should remind you of the cyclic bromonium and mercurinium ions

formed as intermediates in electrophilic addition reactions of alkenes (Sections4.7

and 4.8). In the second step of the reaction,water attacks the most substituted carbon

of the cyclic intermediate (Section4.8). Oxygen loses a proton to form a mercuric

enol,which immediately rearranges to a mercuric ketone. Loss of the mercuric ion

forms an enol,which rearranges to a ketone. Notice that the overall addition of water

follows both the general rule for electrophilic addition reactions and Markovnikov
Õsrule:The electrophile (in the case of Markovnikov
Õs rule) adds to the 
spcarbonbonded to the greater number of hydrogens.PROBLEM 10What ketones would be formed from the acid-catalyzed hydration of 3-heptyne?
PROBLEM 11Which alkyne would be the best reagent to use for the synthesis of each of the following
ketones?
a.b.c.
OCH3COCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OCH3CCH3HCH3CH2CCHH
2OH2SO4HgSO4OHOCH3CH2CCH
2CH3CH2CCH
3a ketonean enol(Hg2)OCH3CH2CCCH
2CH3H2OCH
3CH2CCH2CH2CH3H2SO4H2SO4OOCH3CCCH
2CH3H2OCH
3CCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH3Section 6.6Addition of Water
247Tutorial:
Mercuric-ion-catalyzed
hydration of an alkyne   Hg2H2OHgH3OH2OHg2CH3CCH
H2OHgOHCH3CCH
HHgOHCH3CCH
OHCH3CCH
2OOHCH3CCH
2HHOCH3CCH3mechanism for the mercuric-ion-catalyzed hydration of an alkyne
a mercuric enol
a mercuric ketone
Hg2CH3CCH
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 247
BH3disiamylborane248CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisPROBLEM 12Draw all the enol tautomers for each of the ketones in Problem 11.
6.7Addition of Borane: HydroborationÐOxidation
Borane adds to alkynes in the same way it adds to alkenes. That is,one mole of 
reacts with three moles of alkyne to form one mole of boron-substituted alkene

(Section4.9). When the addition reaction is over,aqueous sodium hydroxide and hy-

drogen peroxide are added to the reaction mixture. The end result,as in the case of

alkenes,is replacement of the boron by an OH group. The enol product immediately

rearranges to a ketone.
In order to obtain the enol as the product of the addition reaction,only one equiva-
lent of can be allowed to add to the alkyne. In other words,the reaction must stop

at the alkene stage. In the case of internal alkynes,the substituents on the boron-

substituted alkene prevent the second addition from occurring. However,there is less

steric hindrance in a terminal alkyne,so it is harder to stop the addition reaction at the

alkene stage. A special reagent called disiamylborane has been developed for use with

terminal alkynes (
ÒsiamylÓstands for secondary iso amyl; amyl is a common name for
a five-carbon fragment). The bulky alkyl groups of disiamylborane prevent a second

addition to the boron-substituted alkene. So borane can be used to hydrate internal

alkynes,but disiamylborane is preferred for the hydration of terminal alkynes.
The addition of borane (or disiamylborane) to a terminal alkyne exhibits the same re-
gioselectivity seen in borane addition to an alkene. Boron,with its electron-seeking

empty orbital,adds preferentially to the 
spcarbon bonded to the hydrogen. In the sec-
ond step of the hydroboration
Ðoxidation reaction,boron is replaced by an OH group.
The overall reaction is 
anti-Markovnikov
addition because the hydrogen does notadd tothe spcarbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens. In hydroboration
Ðoxidation,is not the electrophile,is the nucleophile. The reaction,however,
doesfollow
the general rule for electrophilic addition reactions:The electrophile adds to the

spcarbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens. Consequently,mercuric-ion-
catalyzed addition of water to a terminal alkyne produces a 
ketone
(the carbonyl group
(BH3)HHBH3RR3 CH3CCCH
3BH3H2OTHFHO, H2O2B3OHO3 CH3CH2CCH3boron-substituted alkenean enolH3CHCH3CCH3CHCH3CCBH3Addition of water to a terminal alkyneforms a ketone.3-D Molecule:Disiamylboranean enolCH3CH3CHCH3CHOCH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CCHBH
H2OHO, H2O2bis(1,2-dimethylpropyl)boranedisiamylboraneCH32CH3CHCH3CH2BCH3CH2HHCCOHCH3CH2HHCCBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 248
Section 6.8Addition of Hydrogen
249Hydroboration
Ðoxidation of a terminalalkyne forms an aldehyde.Herbert H. M. Lindlarwas born inSwitzerland in 1909 and received a

Ph.D. from the University of Bern.

He worked at Hoffmann-La Roche

and Co. in Basel,Switzerland,and he

authored many patents. His last

patent was a procedure for isolating

the carbohydrate xylose from the

waste produced in paper mills.
is noton the terminal carbon),whereas hydroboration
Ðoxidation of a terminal alkyne
produces an aldehyde(the carbonyl group 
ison the terminal carbon).PROBLEM 13Give the products of (1) mercuric-ion-catalyzed addition of water and (2) hydroboration
Ðoxidation for the following:
a.1-butyneb.2-butynec.2-pentyne
PROBLEM 14There is only one alkyne that forms an aldehyde when it undergoes either acid- or
mercuric-ion-catalyzed addition of water. Identify the alkyne.
6.8Addition of Hydrogen
Hydrogen adds to an alkyne in the presence of a metal catalyst such as palladium,plat-
inum,or nickel in the same manner that it adds to an alkene (Section4.11). It is diffi-

cult to stop the reaction at the alkene stage because hydrogen readily adds to alkenes

in the presence of these efficient metal catalysts. The product of the hydrogenation re-

action,therefore,is an alkane.
The reaction can be stopped at the alkene stage if a 
ÒpoisonedÓ(partially deactivat-
ed) metal catalyst is used. The most commonly used partially deactivated metal cata-

lyst is Lindlar catalyst,which is prepared by precipitating palladium on calcium

carbonate and treating it with lead(II) acetate and quinoline. This treatment modifies

the surface of the palladium,making it much more effective at catalyzing the addition

of hydrogen to a triple bond than to a double bond.Because the alkyne sits on the surface of the metal catalyst and the hydrogens are
delivered to the triple bond from the surface of the catalyst,only syn addition of hy-

drogen occurs (Section5.19). Syn addition of hydrogen to an internal alkyne forms a

cis alkene
.Internal alkynes can be converted into 
trans alkenes
using sodium (or lithium) in
liquid ammonia. The reaction stops at the alkene stage because sodium (or lithium) re-

acts more rapidly with triple bonds than with double bonds. Ammonia (bp
33 ¡C)H2CH3CH2C2-pentyneCCH3catalystLindlarHHcis-2-penteneCH3CH3CH2CCH2Pt/CCH3CH2CCH
CH3CH2CHH2Pt/CCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2alkynealkenealkane
a ketonean aldehydeH2O, H2SO4HgSO4CH3CCH
CH3CCH
2CH3CCH3OHO
1. disiamylborane2. HO, H2O2, H2OCH3CHCH
CH3CH2CHOHO(CH3COO)2Pb2+lead(II) acetatequinolineNTutorial:
Hydrogenation/Lindlar
catalystBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 249
is a gas at room temperature,so it is kept in the liquid state by using a dry ice/acetone
mixture The first step in the mechanism of this reaction is transfer of the 
sorbital electronfrom sodium (or lithium) to an 
spcarbon to form a 
radical anion
Ña species with a
negative charge and an unpaired electron. (Recall that sodium and lithium have a

strong tendency to lose the single electron in their outer-shell 
sorbital; Section1.3.)
The radical anion is such a strong base that it can remove a proton from ammonia. This

results in the formation of a vinylic radicalÑthe unpaired electron is on a vinylic car-
bon. Another single-electron transfer from sodium (or lithium) to the vinylic radical

forms a vinylic anion. The vinylic anion abstracts a proton from another molecule of

ammonia. The product is the trans alkene.
The vinylic anion can have either the cis or the trans configuration. The cis and
trans configurations are in equilibrium,but the equilibrium favors the more stable

trans configuration because in this configuration the bulky alkyl groups are as far from

each other as possible.PROBLEM 15What alkyne would you start with and what reagents would you use if you wanted to
synthesize:a.pentane?b.
cis-2-butene?c.
trans
-2-pentene?d.1-hexene?
6.9Acidity of a Hydrogen Bonded
to an spHybridized CarbonCarbon forms nonpolar covalent bonds with hydrogen because carbon and hydrogen,
having similar electronegativities,share their bonding electrons almost equally. How-

ever,not all carbon atoms have the same electronegativity. An 
sphybridized carbon ismore electronegative than an hybridized carbon,which is more electronegative
sp2trans vinylic anionmore stableCCCH3cis vinylic anionless stableCCH3CH3HCCH3HCH3C2-butyneCCH3NH3 (liq)Na or LiHHtrans-2-butene78 ûCCH3CH3CC(bp78 ¡C).250CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisTutorial:
Synthesis of trans alkenes
using (liq)NaNH3Ca radical anionCH    NH
2CCH3a vinylic radicalCCH3a vinylic aniona trans alkene
CH3CH3CCCH3CH3Na Na Na NH2 NH2H    NH
2NaCH3CH3CCHHHCH3CHCH3C3-D Molecules:Trans and cis vinylic anions
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 250
Section 6.9Acidity of a Hydrogen Bonded to an 
spHybridized Carbon251spHybridized carbons are more elec-
tronegative than hybridized car-

bons, which are more electronegative

than hybridized carbons.
sp3sp2than an hybridized carbon,which is just slightly more electronegative than a hy-
drogen. (Chapter1,Problem 40d,e,and f.)
Why does the type of hybridization affect the electronegativity of the carbon atom?
Electronegativity is a measure of the ability of an atom to pull the bonding electrons

toward itself. Thus,the most electronegative carbon atom will be the one with its

bonding electrons closest to the nucleus. The average distance of a 2
selectron fromthe nucleus is less than the average distance of a 2
pelectron from the nucleus. There-
fore,the electrons in an 
sphybrid orbital (50% scharacter) are closer,on average,to
the nucleus than those in an hybrid orbital (33.3% 
scharacter). In turn,elec-
trons are closer to the nucleus than electrons (25% 
scharacter). The sphybridizedcarbon,therefore,is the most electronegative.
In Section1.18we saw that the acidity of a hydrogen attached to some second-row el-
ements depends on the electronegativity of the atom to which the hydrogen is attached.

The greater the electronegativity of the atom,the greater the acidity of the hydrogen
Ñthe stronger the acid. (DonÕt forget,the stronger the acid,the lower its )
Because the electronegativity of carbon atoms follows the order 
ethyne is a stronger acid than ethene,and ethene is a stronger acid than ethane.
We can compare the acidities of these compounds with the acidities of hydrogens
attached to other second-row elements.
The corresponding conjugate bases of these compounds have the following relative
base strengths because the stronger the acid,the weaker is its conjugate base
.In order to remove a proton from an acid (in a reaction that strongly favors prod-
ucts),the base that removes the proton must be stronger than the base that is generated

as a result of proton removal (Section1.17). In other words,you must start with a

stronger base than the base that will be formed. The amide ion can remove a
(NH2)HCCH
pKa  25p
Ka  44p
Ka  50H2CCH2CH3CH3ethyneetheneethane
spsp2sp3,pa.sp3sp2sp2relative electronegativities of carbon atoms
spsp
2sp3>>leastelectronegativemost
electronegativesp3relative electronegativities
NOF
<<relative acid strengths
NH3pKa  36p
Ka  15.7p
Ka  3.2H2OHF
<<most electronegativestrongest acidrelative acid strengths
<<<
HCCH
pKa  25pKa  44pKa  50H2CCH2pKa  36NH3<pKa  15.7H2O<pKa  3.2HFCH3CH3strongestacidweakestacidrelative base strengths
>>>
HCC
H2CCHH2N>HO>FCH3CH2weakestbasestrongestbaseThe stronger the acid, the weaker its
conjugate base.BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 251
hydrogen bonded to an 
spcarbon of a terminal alkyne to form a carbanion called an
acetylide ion,because the amide ion is a stronger base than the acetylide ion.
If hydroxide ion were used to remove a hydrogen bonded to an 
spcarbon,the reaction
would strongly favor the reactants because hydroxide ion is a much weaker base than

the acetylide ion that would be formed.
The amide ion cannot remove a hydrogen bonded to an or an carbon. Only
a hydrogen bonded to an 
spcarbon is sufficiently acidic to be removed by the amide
ion. Consequently,a hydrogen bonded to an 
spcarbon sometimes is referred to as an
ÒacidicÓhydrogen. The ÒacidicÓproperty of terminal alkynes is one way their reactiv-
ity differs from that of alkenes. Be careful not to misinterpret what is meant when we

say that a hydrogen bonded to an 
spcarbon is Òacidic.ÓIt is more acidic than mostother carbon-bound hydrogens but it is much less acidic than a hydrogen of a water

molecule,and water is only a very weakly acidic compound (p
a15.7).sp3sp2acetylide anionstronger basehydroxide anion
weaker basestronger acidRCC
HOHOweaker acidRCCH
acetylide ionweaker baseamide ionstronger baseweaker acidRCC
NH2NHstronger acidRCCH
252CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisSODIUM AMIDE AND SODIUMTake care not to confuse sodium amide 
with sodium (Na) in liquid ammonia. Sodium amide
(Na NH2)is the strong base used to remove a proton from a terminal alkyne.
Sodium is used as a source of electrons in the reduction of an

internal alkyne to a trans alkene (Section6.8).
PROBLEM 16Any base whose conjugate acid has a greater than _________ can remove a proton

from a terminal alkyne to form an acetylide ion (in a reaction that favors products).
PROBLEM 17Which carbocation in each of the following pairs is more stable?
a.or b.or 
PROBLEM 18Explain why sodium amide cannot be used to form a carbanion from an alkane in a reac-
tion that favors products?
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
a.List the following compounds in order of decreasing acidity:
To compare the acidities of a group of compounds,first look at how they differ. These
three compounds differ in the hybridization of the nitrogen to which the acidic hydro-

gen is attached. Now,recall what you know about hybridization and acidity. You know

that hybridization of an atom affects its electronegativity (
spis more electronegative
than and is more electronegative than ); and you know that the more elec-

tronegative the atom to which a hydrogen is attached,the more acidic the hydrogen.

Now you can answer the question.
sp3sp2sp2,CH3CNHCH3CHNH2CH3CH2NH3HCCH2CCHH2CCHCH3CH2paTo remove a proton from an acid in a
reaction that favors products, the base

that removes the proton must be

stronger than the base that is formed.
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 252
b.Draw the conjugate bases and list them in order of decreasing basicity.
First remove a proton from each acid to get the structures of the conjugate bases,and

then recall that the stronger the acid,the weaker its conjugate base.
Now continue on to Problem 19.
PROBLEM 19List the following species in order of decreasing basicity:
6.10Synthesis Using Acetylide IonsReactions that form carbon
Ðcarbon bonds are important in the synthesis of organic
compounds because without such reactions,we could not convert molecules with

small carbon skeletons into molecules with larger carbon skeletons. Instead,the prod-

uct of a reaction would always have the same number of carbons as the starting

material.One reaction that forms a carbon
Ðcarbon bond is the reaction of an acetylide ion
with an alkyl halide. Only primary alkyl halides or methyl halides should be used in

this reaction.The mechanism of this reaction is well understood. Bromine is more electronega-
tive than carbon,and as a result,the electrons in the bond are not shared equal-

ly by the two atoms. This means that the bond is polar,with a partial positive

charge on carbon and a partial negative charge on bromine. The negatively charged

acetylide ion (a nucleophile) is attracted to the partially positively charged carbon (an

electrophile) of the alkyl halide. As the electrons of the acetylide ion approach the car-

bon to form the new carbon
Ðcarbon bond,they push out the bromine and its bonding
electrons because carbon can bond to no more than four atoms at a time. This is an ex-

ample of an alkylation reaction
. An alkylation reaction
attaches an alkyl group to the
starting material.The mechanism of this and similar reactions will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter10. At that time we will also see why the reaction works best with primary

alkyl halides and methyl halides.
Simply by choosing an alkyl halide of the appropriate structure,terminal alkynes
can be converted into internal alkynes of any desired chain length.
1-pentyne4-decyne
1.  NaNH22.  CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2ClCHCH3CH2CH2CCCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CCCH3CH2CCH
3CH2CH2BrCCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CBr

CBrCBr3-heptyneCCH3CH2CCH
3CH2CH2BrCCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CBr
CH3CH2CHCHCH
3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CCCH3CH2OFNH
2CH3CCa.b.
CH3CH2NH2relative basicitiesNCH3CHCH3CNHCH3Crelative aciditiesNHCH3CHCH3CH2NH3NH2Section 6.10Synthesis Using Acetylide Ions
2533-D Molecules:Anion of 1-butyne;
1-bromopropaneBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 253
254CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisPROBLEM 20SOLVED
A chemist wants to synthesize 4-decyne but cannot find any 1-pentyne,the starting mater-
ial used in the synthesis just described. How else can 4-decyne be synthesized?
SOLUTIONThe spcarbons of 4-decyne are bonded to a propyl group and to a pentyl
group. Therefore to obtain 4-decyne,the acetylide ion of 1-pentyne can react with a pentyl

halide or the acetylide ion of 1-heptyne can react with a propyl halide. Since 1-pentyne is

not available,the chemist should use 1-heptyne and a propyl halide.
6.11Designing a Synthesis I:An Introduction to Multistep Synthesis
For each reaction we have studied so far,we have seen 
whythe reaction occurs,howitoccurs,and the products that are formed. A good way to review these reactions is to

design syntheses,because in doing so,you have to be able to recall many of the reac-

tions you have learned.
Synthetic chemists consider time,cost,and yield in designing syntheses. In the in-
terest of time,a well-designed synthesis should require as few steps (sequential reac-

tions) as possible,and those steps should each involve a reaction that is easy to carry

out. If two chemists in a pharmaceutical company were each asked to prepare a new

drug,and one synthesized the drug in three simple steps while the other used 20 diffi-

cult steps,which chemist would not get a raise? In addition,each step in the synthesis

should provide the greatest possible yield of the desired product,and the cost of the

starting materials must be considered. The more reactant needed to synthesize one

gram of product,the more expensive it is to produce. Sometimes it is preferable to de-

sign a synthesis involving several steps if the starting materials are inexpensive,the re-

actions are easy to carry out,and the yield of each step is high. This would be better

than designing a synthesis with fewer steps that require expensive starting materials

and reactions that are more difficult or give lower yields. At this point you don
Õt know
how much chemicals cost or how difficult it is to carry out certain reactions. So,for the

time being,when you design a synthesis,just try to find the route with the fewest

steps.The following examples will give you an idea of the type of thinking required for
the design of a successful synthesis. This kind of problem will appear repeatedly

throughout this book because working such problems is a good way to learn organic

chemistry.
Example 1.Starting with 1-butyne,how could you make the following ketone? You
can use any organic and inorganic reagents.
Many chemists find that the easiest way to design a synthesis is to work backward. In-
stead of looking at the starting material and deciding how to do the first step of the

synthesis,look at the product and decide how to do the last step. The product is a ke-

tone. At this point the only reaction you know that forms a ketone is the addition of

water (in the presence of a catalyst) to an alkyne. If the alkyne used in the reaction has

identical substituents on each of the 
spcarbons,only one ketone will be obtained.
Thus,3-hexyne is the best alkyne to use for the synthesis of the desired ketone.
CH3CH2CCH
3CH2CCH2CH2CH3CHO?1-butyne1-heptyne4-decyne
1.  NaNH22.  CH3CH2CH2ClCHCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CCCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 254
Section 6.11Designing a Synthesis I: An Introduction to Multistep Synthesis
2553-Hexyne can be obtained from the starting material by removing a proton from the 
spcarbon,followed by alkylation. To obtain the desired product,a two-carbon alkyl

halide must be used in the alkylation reaction.
Designing a synthesis by working backward from product to reactant is not simply
a technique taught to organic chemistry students. It is used so frequently by experi-

enced synthetic chemists that it has been given a name
Ñretrosynthetic analysis
.Chemists use open arrows to indicate they are working backward. Typically,the

reagents needed to carry out each step are not included until the reaction is written in

the forward direction. For example,the route to the synthesis of the previous ketone

can be arrived at by the following retrosynthetic analysis.
Once the complete sequence of reactions has been worked out by retrosynthetic analy-
sis,the synthetic scheme can be shown by reversing the steps and including the

reagents required for each step.Example 2.Starting with ethyne,how could you make 1-bromopentane?
A primary alkyl halide can be prepared from a terminal alkene (using HBr in the
presence of a peroxide). A terminal alkene can be prepared from a terminal alkyne,

and a terminal alkyne can be prepared from ethyne and an alkyl halide with the

appropriate number of carbons.Now we can write the synthetic scheme.
HCCHCH
3CH2CH2CH2CH2Br?ethyne1-bromopentane
CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCH
retrosynthetic analysisOCH3CH2CCH
CCH2CH3CH3CH2C1. NaNH22. CH3CH2Br1-butyne3-hexyne
CH3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCHCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OOHH2OH2SO43-hexyneElias James Corey
coined the termÒretrosynthetic analysis.ÓHe was

born in Massachusetts in 1928 and is

a professor of chemistry at Harvard

University. He received the Nobel

Prize in chemistry in 1990 for his

contribution to synthetic organic

chemistry.
CH3CH2CCH
CCH2CH3CH3CH2C1. NaNH22. CH3CH2BrCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OH2OH2SO4synthesisCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2CHCH
2retrosynthetic analysisCH3CH2CH2CCH
HCCH
1. NaNH22. CH3CH2CH2BrLindlarcatalystH2HBrperoxideHCCH
CH3CH2CH2CCH
3CH2CH2CHCHsynthesisCH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2BrBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 255
256CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep SynthesisExample 3.How could 2,6-dimethylheptane be prepared from an alkyne and an alkyl
halide? (The prime on signifies that R and are different alkyl groups.)
2,6-Dimethyl-3-heptyne is the only alkyne that will form the desired alkane upon hy-
drogenation. This alkyne can be dissected in two different ways. In one case the alkyne

could be prepared from the reaction of an acetylide ion with a primary alkyl halide

(isobutyl bromide); in the other case the acetylide ion would have to react with a sec-

ondary alkyl halide (isopropyl bromide).
Because we know that the reaction of an acetylide ion with an alkyl halide works best
with primary alkyl halides and methyl halides,we know how to proceed:
Example 4.How could you carry out the following synthesis using the given starting
material?An alcohol can be prepared from an alkene,and an alkene can be prepared from an
alkyne.
You can use either of the two methods you know to convert an alkyne into an alkene,
because this alkene does not have cis
Ðtrans isomers. HydroborationÐoxidation must be
used to convert the alkene into the desired alcohol,because acid-catalyzed addition of

water would not form the desired alcohol.
Example 5.How could you prepare (
E)-2-pentene from ethyne?CCCH3CH2HCH
3HHCCH
?(E)-2-penteneCH2CH2OHCHCH
2CCH
retrosynthetic analysis?CCH2CH2OHCHCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CHCH3CH3CHCH2CCCHCH
3CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2BrorCCHCH3HCCH3CH3CH3CHBrHCCCH
2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3retrosynthetic analysisRCCH
CH3CH3RBrCH
3CHCH2CH2CH2CHCH3?2,6-dimethylheptaneRRLindlarcatalyst or Na/NH3 (liq)synthesis1. BH32. HO, H2O2, H2OCH2CH2OHCHCH
2CCH
H21. NaNH22. CH3CHCH2BrPd/CH2CH3CH3CH3CHCCH
CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CCH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CHCH3CCHCH3synthesisBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 256
A trans alkene can be prepared from an internal alkyne. The alkyne needed to synthe-
size the desired alkene can be prepared from 1-butyne and a methyl halide. 1-Butyne

can be prepared from ethyne and an ethyl halide.Example 6.How could you prepare 3,3-dibromohexane from reagents that contain no
more than two carbon atoms?
A geminal dibromide can be prepared from an alkyne. 3-Hexyne is the desired alkyne
because it will form one geminal bromide,whereas 2-hexyne would form two differ-

ent geminal dibromides. 3-Hexyne can be prepared from 1-butyne and ethyl bromide,

and 1-butyne can be prepared from ethyne and ethyl bromide.
PROBLEM 21Startingwith acetylene,how could the following compounds be synthesized?
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
ClClCH3CCH3CCCH3HHCH3BrCH3CHCH3CH3CHCH2OCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CH2CCH?CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3reagents with no more than 2 carbon atomsBrBr3,3-dibromohexaneSection 6.11Designing a Synthesis I: An Introduction to Multistep Synthesis
257CH3CH2CCCCH3CH2CH3CH2HCH
3HCCH3CH3CH2CCHHCCH
CCHCH
3H1. NaNH22. CH3CH2Br1. NaNH22. CH3BrNH3 (liq)NaHCCHCH
3CH2CCHCH
3CH2CCCH
3retrosynthetic analysissynthesisCH3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCHHCCH
CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3BrBrretrosynthetic analysis1. NaNH22. CH3CH2Br1. NaNH22. CH3CH2Brexcess HBrHCCHCH
3CH2CCHCH
3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3synthesisBrBrTutorial:
Retrosynthesis using alkynes
as reagentsBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 257
258CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep Synthesis6.12Commercial Use of Ethyne
Most of the ethyne produced commercially is used as a starting material for 
polymersthat we encounter daily,such as vinyl flooring,plastic piping,Teflon,and acrylics.

Polymers are large molecules that are made by linking together many small molecules.

The small molecules used to make polymers are called 
monomers
. The mechanisms
by which monomers are converted into polymers are discussed in Chapter28.
Poly(vinyl chloride),the polymer produced from the polymerization of vinyl chloride,
is known as PVC. Straight-chain poly(vinyl chloride) is hard and rather brittle; branched

poly(vinyl chloride) is the soft elastic vinyl commonly used both as a substitute for leather

and in the manufacture of such things as garbage bags and shower curtains (Section 28.2).

Poly(acrylonitrile) looks like wool when it is made into fibers. It is marketed under the

trade names Orlon¨(DuPont),Creslan
¨(Sterling Fibers),and Acrilan
¨(Monsanto).a monomera polymeracrylonitrilepoly(acrylonitrile)Orlonpoymer
izationHCCHH2CCH
2CHCNCHCNHCNnvinyl chloridea monomerpoly(vinyl chloride) PVCa polymerpolymerizationHCCHH2CCH
2CHClCHClHClnETHYNE CHEMISTRY 
OR THE FORWARD PASS?
Father Julius Arthur Nieuwland (1878
Ð1936) did much of
the early work on the polymerization of ethyne. He was born in Belgium

and settled with his parents in South Bend,Indiana,two years later. He

became a priest and a professor of botany and chemistry at the Universi-

ty of Notre Dame,where Knute Rockne
Ñthe inventor of the forward
passÑworked for him as a research assistant. Rockne also taught chem-
istry at Notre Dame,but when he received an offer to coach the football

team,he switched fields,in spite of Father Nieuwland
Õs attempts to con-vince him to continue his work as a scientist.
Knute Rockne in hisuniform during the
year he was captain of
the Notre Dame
football team.SummaryAlkynes
are hydrocarbons that contain a carbon
Ðcarbontriple bond. A triple bond can be thought of as a cylinder of

electrons wrapped around the bond. The functional group

suffix of an alkyne is 
Òyne.ÓA terminal alkyne
has thetriple bond at the end of the chain; an 
internal alkyne
hasthe triple bond located elsewhere along the chain. Internal

alkynes,with two alkyl substituents bonded to the 
spcar-bons,are more stable than terminal alkynes. We now have

seen that alkyl groups stabilize alkenes,alkynes,carbo-
cations,andalkyl radicals.
An alkyne is 
lessreactive than an alkene because a
vinylic cationis less stable than a similarly substitutedsalkyl cation. Like alkenes,alkynes undergo electrophilic
addition reactions. The same reagents that add to alkenes

add to alkynes. Electrophilic addition to a 
terminalalkyne is regioselective; in all electrophilic addition reac-

tions to terminal alkynes,the 
electrophile
adds to the 
spcarbon that is bonded to the hydrogen because the inter-

mediate formed
Ña secondary vinylic cation
Ñis more
stable than a primary vinylic cation. If excess reagent is

available,alkynes can undergo a second addition reaction

with hydrogen halides and halogens because the product

of the first reaction is an alkene. An alkyl peroxide has

the same effect on the addition of HBr to an alkyne that it
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 258
Summary of Reactions259Summary of Reactions1.Electrophilic addition reactions
a.Addition of hydrogen halides (is the electrophile; Section6.5)
b.Addition of hydrogen bromide in the presence of a peroxide (is the electrophile; Section6.5)
c.Addition of halogens (Section6.5)
d.Addition of water/hydroboration
Ðoxidation (Sections6.6and 6.7)
1. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2, H2ORCCR
RCCH2RRCH2CROOH2O, H2SO4HgSO4RCCH
RCCH
2RCCH3OHO
1. disiamylborane2. HO, H2O2, H2ORCHCHRCH
2CHOHO
H2O, H2SO4oran internalalkynea terminalalkyneClClCl
ClCl
ClCl2CH2Cl2Cl2CH2Cl2RCCHRCCHRC
CHBrBr
BrBr
BrBr2CH2Cl2Br2CH2Cl2RCCCH
3RCCCH
3RCCCH3BrperoxideRCCHHBr
RCHCHBr
BrHXexcess HXRCCH
RCCH
2RCXXHXHF, HCl, HBr, HI
XCH3Hhas on the addition of HBr to an alkene
Ñit reverses the
order of addition because the peroxide causes to be-

come the electrophile.When an alkyne undergoes the acid-catalyzed addition of
water,the product of the reaction is an enol. The enol imme-

diately rearranges to a ketone. A 
ketone
is a compound that
has two alkyl groups bonded to a 
carbonylgroup
.An aldehyde
is a compound that has at least one hydrogen
bonded to a carbonyl group. The ketone and enol are called

ketoÐenol tautomers
; they differ in the location of a double
bond and a hydrogen. Interconversion of the tautomers is

called tautomerization. The keto tautomer predominates at
equilibrium. Terminal alkynes add water if mercuric ion is

added to the acidic mixture. In hydroboration
Ðoxidation,is not the electrophile,is the nucleophile. Consequently,

mercuric-ion-catalyzed addition of water to a terminal

alkyne produces a 
ketone
,whereas hydroboration
Ðoxidationof a terminal alkyne produces an 
aldehyde.Hydrogen adds to an alkyne in the presence of a metal
catalyst (Pd,Pt,or Ni) to form an alkane. Addition of hy-

drogen to an internal alkyne in the presence of Lindlar cat-
HH(CO)Bralyst forms a cis alkene
. Sodium in liquid ammonia con-
verts an internal alkyne to a 
trans alkene
.Electronegativity decreases with decreasing percentage of
scharacter in the orbital. Thus the electronegativities of car-
bon atoms decrease in the order:Ethyne is,

therefore,a stronger acid than ethene,and ethene is a stronger

acid than ethane. An amide ion can remove a hydrogen bond-

ed to an 
spcarbon of a terminal alkyne because it is a stronger
base than the acetylide ionthat is formed. The acetylide ion
can undergo an alkylation reaction with a methyl halide or a

primary alkyl halide to form an internal alkyne. An 
alkylation
reaction
attaches an alkyl group to the starting material.
Designing a synthesis by working backward is called
retrosynthetic analysis
. Chemists use open arrows to in-
dicate they are working backward. The reagents needed to

carry out each step are not included until the reaction is

written in the forward direction.
Most ethyne produced commercially is for the synthe-sis of monomers used in the synthesis of polymers.

Polymers
are large molecules that are made by linking
together many small molecules called monomers.
spsp2sp3.Tutorial:
Common terms in the
reactions of alkynesBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 259
260CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep Synthesis2.Addition of hydrogen (Section6.8)
3.Removal of a proton,followed by alkylation (Sections6.9and 6.10)
NaNH2RCH2BrRCCH
RCC
RCCCH
2RRC2 H
2RCH2CH2RCRPd/C, Pt/C, or NiRH2CCC
HHRRCRLindlarcatalystRCCC
RHHRCRNa or LiNH3 (liq)Key Terms
acetylide ion (p.252)
aldehyde (p.246)

alkylation reaction (p.253)

alkynes (p.238)

carbonyl group (p.246)

enol (p.246)
geminal dihalide (p.243)
internal alkyne (p.239)

keto
Ðenol tautomers (p.246)
ketone (p.246)

polymers (p.258)

radical anion (p.250)
retrosynthetic analysis (p.255)
tautomerization (p.246)

tautomers (p.246)

terminal alkyne (p.239)

vinylic cation (p.243)

vinylic radical (p.250)
Problems
22.Give the major product obtained from reaction of each of the following with excess HCl:
23.Draw a structure for each of the following:
a.2-hexyneg.1-bromo-1-pentyne

b.5-ethyl-3-octyneh.propargyl bromide

c.methylacetylenei.diethylacetylene

d.vinylacetylenej.di-
tert-butylacetylene
e.methoxyethynek.cyclopentylacetylene

f.sec-butyl-
tert-butylacetylenel.5,6-dimethyl-2-heptyne
24.Identify the electrophile and the nucleophile in each of the following reaction steps. Then draw curved arrows to illustrate
 thebond-making and -breaking processes.CH3CH2CCH
2++CH3CH2CCH
2C1ÐC1CH3CHBr
CHBrÐCH3CCH
2CH3CÐNH2CHÐNH2CH3CCÐCH3CH2CCH
CH3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCCH
2CH2CH3a.b.c.
BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 260
Problems26125.Give the systematic name for each of the following structures:
a.c.
b.d.
26.What reagents could be used to carry out the following syntheses?
27.Al Kyne was given the structural formulas of several compounds and was asked to give them systematic names. How many did Al
name correctly? Correct those that are misnamed.
a.4-ethyl-2-pentynec.2-methyl-3-hexyne

b.1-bromo-4-heptyned.3-pentyne
28.Draw the structures and give the common and systematic names for the seven alkynes with molecular formula 

29.How could the following compounds be synthesized,starting with a hydrocarbon that has the same number of carbon atoms as the
desired product?a.c.
b.d.
30.What reagents would you use for the following syntheses?
a.(
Z)-3-hexene from 3-hexyne
b.(
E)-3-hexene from 3-hexyne
c.hexane from 3-hexyne
31.What is the molecular formula of a hydrocarbon that has 1 triple bond,2 double bonds,1 ring,and 32 carbons?

32.What will be the major product of the reaction of 1mol of propyne with each of the following reagents?
a.HBr (1mol)g.

b.HBr (2mol)h.excess 

c.i.catalyst

d.j.sodium in liquid ammonia

e.aqueous k.sodium amide

f.disiamylborane followed by l.product of Problem k followed by 1-chloropentane
33.Answer Problem 32,using 2-butyne as the starting material instead of propyne.

34.a.Starting with isopropylacetylene,how could you prepare the following alcohols?
1.2-methyl-2-pentanol

2.4-methyl-2-pentanol
b.In each case a second alcohol would also be obtained. What alcohol would it be?
35.How many of the following names are correct? Correct the incorrect names.
a.4-heptyned.2,3-dimethyl-5-octyne

b.2-ethyl-3-hexynee.4,4-dimethyl-2-pentyne

c.4-chloro-2-pentynef.2,5-dimethyl-3-hexyne
H2O2HOH2SO4, HgSO4Br2(2 mol)CH2Cl2H2LindlarBr2(1 mol)CH2Cl2H2PtHBrH2O2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2OHOCH3CH2CH2CCH2CH2CH2CH3OCH3CH2CH2CH2CHC6H10.RCH2CH2BrRCH2CH3BrRCHCH3BrBrBrRCCH3ORCCH3ORCH2CHRCCHRCHCH2RCCH2CH3ClCH3CHCH2CCCHCH
3CH2CH2CH3CH3CCCH
2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CCCH
2CCH3BrCH3CCCH
2CHCH3BRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 261
262CHAPTER 6R
eactions of Alkynes ¥ Introduction to Multistep Synthesis36.Which of the following pairs are keto
Ðenol tautomers?a.d.
b.e.

c.37.Using ethyne as the starting material,how can the following compounds be prepared?
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
38.Give the stereoisomers obtained from the reaction of 2-butyne with the following reagents:
a.1. catalyst2. 

b.1. 2. 

c.1. 2. 
39.Draw the keto tautomer for each of the following:
a.b.c.d.
40.Show how each of the following compounds could be prepared using the given starting material,any necessary inorganic reagent
s,and any necessary organic compound that has no more than four carbon atoms:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
41.Dr. Polly Meher was planning to synthesize 3-octyne by adding
1-bromobutane to the product obtained from the reaction of 1-butyne with sodium amide. Unfortunately,however,she had

forgotten to order 1-butyne. How else can she prepare 3-octyne?
42.a.Explain why a single pure product is obtained from hydroboration
Ðoxidation of 2-butyne,whereas two products are obtained
from hydroborationÐoxidation of 2-pentyne.b.Name two other internal alkynes that will yield only one product on hydroboration
Ðoxidation.43.Give the configurations of the products obtained from the following reactions:
44.In Section6.4it was stated that hyperconjugation is less effective in stabilizing the charge on a vinylic cation than the ch
arge on an
alkyl cation. Why do you think this is so?
CH3CH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH2CCCH
2CH31. Na, NH3(liq)2. D2, Pd/C1. H2/Lindlar catalyst2. D2, Pd/Ca.b.CCCH
3HHCH3CCOHCH3CH2CH2CHCH3HCCHOCCCH3CHBrCH3CH2CHCH3HCCHOCCH2CHCHOCH3CH2CH2CH2CCH3HCCHCHOHOHCH2OHCH3CH2CH2CCCH3OHCH3CHBr2CH2Cl2Cl2CH2Cl2Br2CH2Cl2NaNH3(liq)Br2CH2Cl2H2LindlarBrCH3CH2CHCH2BrOCH3CCH3OCH3CHCH3CH2CHCHOHCH
3CH2CH2CHandOCH2OOHCH3CH2CH2CCH
3CH2CH2CCH3andOOHCH3CHCH3CH3CCH3andCH3CH2CH2CHCHOHCH
3CH2CH2CCH3andOOCH3CH2CHCHCH
2OHCH
3CH2CH2CH2CHandBRUI06-238_262r4  24-03-2003  11:47 AM  Page 262
cyclohexanebenzeneAs youcontinue your study of organic chemistry,you will
notice that the concept of having delocalized electrons is

invoked frequently to explain the behavior of organic
compounds. For example,in Chapter8you will see that having

delocalized electrons causes certain dienes to form products that

would not be expected on the basis of what you have learned about electrophilic addi-

tion reactions in Chapters3Ð6. Electron delocalization is such an important concept

that this entire chapter is devoted to it. 
Electrons that are restricted to a particular region are called 
localized electrons
.Localized electrons either belong to a single atom or are confined to a bond between

two atoms.
Not all electrons are confined to a single atom or bond. Many organic compounds
contain delocalizedelectrons. Delocalized electrons
neither belong to a single atomnor are confined to a bond between two atoms,but are shared by three or more atoms.

You were first introduced to delocalized electrons in Section1.19,where you saw that

the two electrons represented by the bond of the group are shared by three

atomsÑthe carbon and both oxygen atoms. The dashed lines indicate that the two

electrons are delocalized over three atoms.
In this chapter,you will learn to recognize compounds that contain delocalized
electrons and to draw structures that represent the electron distribution in molecules
OÐOÐdelocalizedelectronsCH3CCOOplocalized electronsCH3NH2localized electronsCH3CHCH
27Electron Delocalization and Resonance ¥
More About Molecular
Orbital Theory263BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 263
264CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ M
ore About Molecular Orbital Theorywith delocalized electrons. You will also be introduced to some of the special charac-
teristics of compounds that have delocalized electrons. You will then be able to under-

stand the wide-ranging effects that delocalized electrons have on the reactivity of

organic compounds. We begin by taking a look at benzene,a compound whose prop-

erties chemists could not explain until they recognized that electrons in organic mole-

cules could be delocalized.7.1Delocalized Electrons: The Structure of Benzene
The structure of benzene puzzled early organic chemists. They knew that benzene had
a molecular formula of that it was an unusually stable compound,and that it did

not undergo the addition reactions characteristic of alkenes (Section3.6). They also

knew the following facts:
1.When a different atom is substituted for one of the hydrogen atoms of benzene,
only one product is obtained.2.When the substituted product undergoes a second substitution,three products
are obtained.What kind of structure might we predict for benzene if we knew only what the early
chemists knew? The molecular formula tells us that benzene has eight fewer

hydrogens than an acyclic (noncyclic) alkane with six carbons 

Benzene,therefore,has a degree of unsaturation of four (Section3.1). This means that

benzene is either an acyclic compound with four bonds,a cyclic compound with

three bonds,a bicyclic compound with two bonds,a tricyclic compound with one
bond,or a tetracyclic compound.
Because only one product is obtained regardless of which of the six hydrogens is
replaced with another atom,we know that all the hydrogens must be identical. Two

structures that fit these requirements are shown here:
Neither of these structures is consistent with the observation that three compounds are
obtained if a second hydrogen is replaced with another atom. The acyclic structure

yields two disubstituted products.
The cyclic structure,with alternating single and slightly shorter double bonds,yields
four disubstituted productsÑa 1,3-disubstituted product,a 1,4-disubstituted prod-
uct,and two 1,2-disubstituted products
Ñbecause the two substituents can be placed
either on two adjacent carbons joined by a single bond or on two adjacent carbons

joined by a double bond.CH3CCCCCH
3CHHHHHHCCCCCpppp(CH22C6H14).(C6H6)C6H6,For every twohydrogens that are
missing from the general molecular

formula a hydrocarbon has

either a bond or a ring.
PCnH2n2 ,replace a hydrogenC6H6C6H5XC6H4X2C6H4X2C6H4X2replace a hydrogenwith an Xwith an X
one monosubstituted compoundthree disubstituted compoundsCH3CCC
replace 2 H'sCCH3CH3CCCCCHBr
BrCCCCCH
2BrBrCH
2andwith Br'sBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 264
Section 7.1Delocalized Electrons: The Structure of Benzene
265In 1865,the German chemist Friedrich Kekul
” suggested a way of resolving this
dilemma. He proposed that benzene was not a single compound,but a mixture of two

compounds in rapid equilibrium.Kekule
Õs proposal explained why only three disubstituted products are obtained when
a monosubstituted benzene undergoes a second substitution. According to Kekul
”,there actually are
four disubstituted products,but the two 1,2-disubstituted products
interconvert too rapidly to be distinguished and separated from each other.
The Kekul
” structures of benzene account for the molecular formula of benzene
and for the number of isomers obtained as a result of substitution. However,they fail

to account for the unusual stability of benzene and for the observation that the double

bonds of benzene do not undergo the addition reactions characteristic of alkenes. That

benzene had a six-membered ring was confirmed in 1901,when Paul Sabatier

(Section4.11) found that the hydrogenation of benzene produced cyclohexane. This,

however,still did not solve the puzzle of benzene
Õs structure.Controversy over the structure of benzene continued until the 1930s,when the new
techniques of X-ray and electron diffraction produced a surprising result:They

showed that 
benzene is a planar moleculeand the six carbonÐcarbon bonds have the
same length. The length of each carbon
Ðcarbon bond is 1.39†,which is shorter than a
carbonÐcarbon single bond (1.54†) but longer than a carbon
Ðcarbon double bondH2, Nibenzenecyclohexane150Ð250 C, 25 atmBrBrrapidequilibriumBrBrrapidequilibriumKekul” structures of benzeneBr1,3-disubstitutedproduct1,4-disubstitutedproduct1,2-disubstitutedproduct1,2-disubstitutedproductreplace 2 H'swith Br'sBrCHHHHCCCCCCHHHHCCCCCHHBrBrCHHHHCCCCCBrCHHHCCCCCBrBrBrCHHHHHCCCCC3-D Molecules:1,2-Difluorobenzene; 
1,3-Difluorobenzene;
1,4-DifluorobenzeneBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 265
266CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryKEKUL…ÕS DREAMFriedrich August Kekul
” von Stradonitz (1829
Ð1896) was born in Germany. He entered the
University of Giessen to study architecture,but switched to

chemistry after taking a course in the subject. He was a pro-

fessor of chemistry at the University of Heidelberg,at the

University of Ghent in Belgium,and then at the University of

Bonn. In 1890,he gave an extemporaneous speech at the

twenty-fifth-anniversary celebration of his first paper on 

the cyclic structure of benzene. In this speech,he claimed

that he had arrived at the Kekul
” structures as a result of
dozing off in front of a fire while working on a textbook. He

dreamed of chains of carbon atoms twisting and turning in a

snakelike motion,when suddenly the head of one snake

seized hold of its own tail and formed a spinning ring.

Recently,the veracity of his snake story has been questioned

by those who point out that there is no written record of the

dream from the time he experienced it in 1861 until the time

he related it in 1890. Others counter that dreams are not the

kind of evidence one publishes in scientific papers,although

it is not uncommon for scientists to report moments of

creativity through the subconscious,when they were not

thinking about science. Also,Kekul
” warned against publish-
ing dreams when he said,ÒLet us learn to dream,and perhaps
Friedrich August Kekul” von StradonitzSir James Dewar (1842Ð1923)
wasborn in Scotland,the son of an

innkeeper. After studying under

Kekul”,he became a professor at

Cambridge University and then at the

Royal Institution in London. DewarÕs

most important work was in the field

of low-temperature chemistry. He

used double-walled flasks with
evacuated space between the walls in

order to reduce heat transmission.

These flasks are now called Dewar

flasksÑbetter known to nonchemists

as thermos bottles.(1.33†; Section1.14). In other words,benzene does not have alternating single and
double bonds.If the carbonÐcarbon bonds all have the same length,they must also have the same
number of electrons between the carbon atoms. This can be so,however,only if the 

electrons of benzene are delocalized around the ring,rather than each pair of elec-

trons being localized between two carbon atoms. To better understand the concept of

delocalized electrons,we
Õll now take a close look at the bonding in benzene.
PROBLEM 1a.How many monosubstituted products would each of the following compounds have?
(Notice that each compound has the same molecular formula as benzene.)1.2.
b.How many disubstituted products would each of the preceding compounds have? (Do
not include stereoisomers.)c.How many disubstituted products would each of the compounds have if stereoisomers
are included?PROBLEM 2Between 1865 and 1890,other possible structures were proposed for benzene,two of

which are shown here:
Considering what nineteenth-century chemists knew about benzene,which is a better pro-
posal for the structure of benzene,Dewar benzene or Ladenburg benzene? Why?
HHHHHHLadenburg benzeneDewar benzeneCH2CHCCCHCH2HCCCCCH2CH3ppAlbert Ladenburg (1842Ð1911)
wasborn in Germany. He was a professor

of chemistry at the University of Kiel.
then we shall learn the truth. But let us also beware not to
publish our dreams until they have been examined by the

wakened mind.
ÓIn 1895,he was made a nobleman by Em-
peror William II. This allowed him to add 
Òvon Stradonitz
Ótohis name. Kekul
”Õs students received three of the first five
Nobel Prizes in chemistry:van
Õt Hoff in 1901 (page194),
Fischer in 1902 (page187),and Baeyer in 1905 (page94).
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 266
Section 7.3Resonance Contributors and the Resonance Hybrid
267a.b.c.d.
7.2The Bonding in BenzeneBenzene is a planar molecule. Each of its six carbon atoms is hybridized. An 
hybridized carbon has bond angles of 120
¡Ñidentical to the size of the angles of aplanar hexagon. Each of the carbons in benzene uses two orbitals to bond to two

other carbons; the third orbital overlaps the 
sorbital of a hydrogen (Figure7.1a).
Each carbon also has a porbital at right angles to the orbitals. Because benzene is
planar,the six 
porbitals are parallel (Figure7.1b). The 
porbitals are close enough forside-to-side overlap,so each 
porbital overlaps the 
porbitals on both adjacent carbons.As a result,the overlapping 
porbitals form a continuous doughnut-shaped cloud of
electrons above,and another doughnut-shaped cloud of electrons below,the plane 

of the benzene ring (Figure7.1c). The electrostatic potential map (Figure7.1d) shows

that all the carbonÐcarbon bonds have the same electron density.
Each of the six electrons,therefore,is localized neither on a single carbon nor in a
bond between two carbons (as in an alkene). Instead,each electron is shared by all six

carbons. The six electrons are delocalized
Ñthey roam freely within the doughnut-
shaped cloudsthat lie over and under the ring of carbon atoms. Consequently,benzene

can be represented by a hexagon containing either dashed lines or a circle,to symbolize

the six delocalized electrons.
This type of representation makes it clear that there are no double bonds in benzene.
We see now that Kekul
”Õs structure for benzene was pretty close to the correct struc-
ture. The actual structure of benzene is a Kekul
” structure with delocalized electrons.
orppppsp2sp2sp2sp2sp23-D Molecule:Benzene7.3Resonance Contributors and the Resonance HybridA disadvantage to using dashed lines to represent delocalized electrons is that they do
not tell us how many electrons are present in the molecule. For example,the dashed

lines inside the hexagon in the representation of benzene indicate that the electrons

are shared equally by all six carbons and that all the carbon
Ðcarbon bonds have the
same length,but they do not show how many electrons are in the ring. Consequent-

ly,chemists prefer to use structures with localized electrons to approximate the actual

structure that has delocalized electrons. The approximate structure with localized elec-

trons is called a resonance contributor
,a 
resonance structure
,or a 
contributing
pppFigure 7.1
(a) The carbonÐcarbon and carbonÐhydrogen bonds in benzene.
(b) The porbital on each carbon of benzene can overlap with two adjacent porbitals.(c) The clouds of electrons above and below the plane of the benzene ring.
(d) The electrostatic potential map for benzene.sBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 267
268CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theoryresonance structure
. The actual structure with delocalized electrons is called a
resonance hybrid
. Notice that it is easy to see that there are six electrons in the ring
of each resonance contributor.
Resonance contributors are shown with a double-headed arrow between them. The
double-headed arrow does 
notmean that the structures are in equilibrium with one
another. Rather,it indicates that the actual structure lies somewhere between the

structures of the resonance contributors. Resonance contributors are merely a conve-

nient way to show the electrons; they do not depict any real electron distribution.

For example,the bond between C-1 and C-2 in benzene is not a double bond,al-

though the resonance contributor on the left implies that it is. Nor is it a single bond,

as represented by the resonance contributor on the right. Neither of the contributing

resonance structures accurately represents the structure of benzene. The actual struc-

ture of benzeneÑthe resonance hybridÑis given by the average of the two resonance
contributors.
The following analogy illustrates the difference between resonance contributors and
the resonance hybrid. Imagine that you are trying to describe to a friend what a

rhinoceros looks like. You might tell your friend that a rhinoceros looks like a cross

between a unicorn and a dragon. The unicorn and the dragon don
Õt really exist,so they
are like the resonance contributors. They are not in equilibrium:A rhinoceros does not

jump back and forth between the two resonance contributors,looking like a unicorn one

minute and a dragon the next. The rhinoceros is real,so it is like the resonance hybrid.

The unicorn and the dragon are simply ways to represent what the actual structure
ÑtherhinocerosÑlooks like. 
Resonance contributors
,like unicorns and dragons
,are imagi-
nary,not real
. Only the resonance hybrid
,like the rhinoceros
,is real
.Electron delocalization occurs only if all the atoms sharing the delocalized elec-
trons lie in or close to the same plane,so that their 
porbitals can effectively overlap.
For example,cyclooctatetraene is not planar,but tub shaped. Because the 
porbitalscannot overlap,each pair of electrons is 
localizedbetween two carbons instead of
being delocalizedover the entire ring of eight carbons.
pdragonresonance contributorunicornresonance contributorrhinocerosresonance hybridpresonance contributorresonance hybridresonance contributor1212pElectron delocalization is shown by
double-headed arrows 

Equilibrium is shown by two arrows

pointing in opposite directions (
).().BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 268
Section 7.4Drawing Resonance Contributors
2693-D Molecule:Cyclooctatetraene7.4Drawing Resonance ContributorsWe have seen that an organic compound with delocalized electrons is generally repre-
sented as a structure with localized electrons,so that we will know how many elec-

trons are present in the molecule. For example,nitroethane is represented as having a

nitrogenÐoxygen double bond and a nitrogenÐoxygen single bond.However,the two nitrogen
Ðoxygen bonds in nitroethane are identical; they each have
the same bond length. A more accurate description of the molecule
Õs structure is ob-
tained by drawing the two resonance contributors. Both resonance contributors show

the compound with a nitrogen
Ðoxygen double bond and a nitrogen
Ðoxygen singlebond,but to show that the electrons are delocalized,the double bond in one contribu-

tor is the single bond in the other.
The resonance hybrid shows that the 
porbital of nitrogen overlaps the 
porbital ofeach oxygen. In other words,the two electrons are shared by three atoms. The reso-

nance hybrid also shows that the two nitrogen
Ðoxygen bonds are identical and that the
negative charge is shared by both oxygen atoms. Although the resonance contributors

tell us where the formal charges reside in a molecule and give us the approximate bond

orders,we need to visualize and mentally average both resonance contributors to ap-

preciate what the actual moleculeÑthe resonance hybridÑlooks like.
Rules for Drawing Resonance ContributorsIn drawing resonance contributors,the electrons in one resonance contributor are
moved to generate the next resonance contributor. As you draw resonance contribu-

tors,keep in mind the following constraints:
1.Only electrons move. The nuclei of the atoms never move.
2.The only electrons that can move are electrons (electrons in bonds) and
lone-pair electrons.3.The total number of electrons in the molecule does not change,and neither do
the numbers of paired and unpaired electrons.ppresonance hybridOONCH3CH2resonance contributorCH3CH2resonance contributorCH3CH2OONOONnitroethaneOONCH3CH2pcyclooctatetraeneno overlapDelocalized electrons result from a 
porbital overlapping the porbitals ofmore than one adjacent atom.
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 269
270CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theoryresonance contributorsresonance hybridresonance contributorsresonance hybridCH3CHCHCH
3CHCH3CHCH3CHCH
CH3CHresonance contributorsCH3CHCH
resonance hybridresonance contributorsresonance hybridCH2resonance contributorsCH3CHCHCHCH
2CHresonance contributorsresonance hybridCH3CHCH
resonance hybridCHCH
CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH
2CH2CH3CHCHCH
CHCH
CHCH
2CHFigure 7.2
Resonance contributors areobtained by moving electrons

toward a positive charge.presonance hybridresonance contributorsCH2CHresonance hybridCHCH2CH2CH2CHresonance contributorsCHH
2CCH
resonance contributorsresonance hybridCHCH2CH2CH2CHCH
resonance hybridresonance contributorsresonance contributorsresonance hybridFigure 7.3
Resonance contributors areobtained by moving electrons

toward a bond. (In the

second example, the red arrows
lead to the resonance
contributor on the right, and
the blue arrows lead to the
resonance contributor on the
left.)ppThe electrons can be moved in one of the following ways:
1.Move electrons toward a positive charge or toward a bond (Figures7.2
and7.3).
2.Move lone-pair electrons toward a bond (Figure7.4).

3.Move a single nonbonding electron toward a bond (Figure7.5).
ppppBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 270
Section 7.4Drawing Resonance Contributors
271Tutorial:
Drawing resonance
contributorsOOOOOOOOOOresonance contributorsresonance contributorsresonance contributors
resonance contributorsRCOONH2RCCOCONH2resonance hybridresonance hybridresonance hybrid
resonance hybridRCONH2CCOOOresonance contributorsresonance hybridresonance contributorsresonance hybridCH3CHCH
3CH3CHCH
CH3CHresonance contributorsCH3CHCH
resonance hybridresonance contributorsCH3resonance hybridNH2NH2NH2NH2NH2NH2Figure 7.4
Resonance contributors areobtained by moving a lone pair
toward a bond.
pNotice that in all cases,the electrons are moved toward an hybridized atom.
Remember that an hybridized carbon is either a double-bonded carbon (it can

accommodate the new electrons by breaking a bond) or a carbon that has a positive

charge or an unpaired electron (Sections1.8and 1.10.) Electrons cannot be moved

toward an hybridized carbon because it cannot accommodate any more electrons.
Because electrons are neither added to nor removed from the molecule when
resonance contributors are drawn,each of the resonance contributors for a particular

compound must have the same net charge. If one resonance structure has a net

charge of all the others must also have net charges of if one has a net charge

of 0,all the others must also have net charges of 0. (A net charge of 0 does not nec-

essarily mean that there is no charge on any of the atoms:A molecule with a positive

charge on one atom and a negative charge on another atom has a net charge of 0.)
Radicals can also have delocalized electrons if the unpaired electron is on a
carbon that is adjacent to an hybridized atom. The arrows in Figure7.5are sin-

gle barbed because they denote the movement of only one electron (Section3.6).
One way to recognize compounds with delocalized electrons is to compare them
with similar compounds in which all the electrons are localized.In the following

example,the compound on the left has delocalized electrons because the lone-pair
sp21;1,sp3psp2sp2BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 271
272CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theoryresonance contributorsresonance hybridresonance contributorsresonance hybridCH3CHCHresonance contributorsCH3CHresonance hybridresonance contributorsCHCH2resonance hybridCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CHCHCH2CH2Figure 7.5
Resonance structures for an allylicradical and for the benzyl radical.electrons on nitrogen can be shared with the adjacent carbon (since the carbon
Ðcarbon bond can be broken):
In contrast,all the electrons in the compound on the right are localized. The lone-pair
electrons on nitrogen cannot be shared with the adjacent carbon because carbon can-

not form five bonds. The octet rule requires that second-row elements be surrounded by

no more than eight electrons,so hybridized carbons cannot accept electrons.

Because an hybridized carbon has a bond that can break,has a positive charge,or

has an unpaired electron,it can accept electrons without violating the octet rule.
The carbocation shown on the left in the next example has delocalized electrons
because the electrons can move into the empty 
porbital of the adjacent carbon
(Section1.10). We know that this carbon has an empty 
porbital since it has a positive
charge.
The electrons in the carbocation on the right are localized because the electrons
cannot move. The carbon they would move to is hybridized,and hybridized

carbons cannot accept electrons. The next example shows a ketone with delocalized electrons (left) and a ketone
with only localized electrons (right):CHOCH3CCHCH
3CHCH3CCHCH
3OOCH2CHCHCH
3CH3Clocalized electronsdelocalized electronsan sp3 hybridized carboncannot accept electronssp3sp3plocalized electronsdelocalized electronsCHCH2CHCH3CHCH2CHCH3CHCH
2CHCH3CH2an sp3 hybridized carboncannot accept electronssp2ppsp2sp3sp3localized electronsan sp3 hybridized carboncannot accept electronsdelocalized electronsCHCH3CHNHCH
3CHCH3CHNHCH
3CHCH
2CH3CHNH
2psp2Tutorial:
Localized and delocalized
electronsBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 272
PROBLEM 3a.Predict the relative bond lengths of the three carbon
Ðoxygen bonds in the carbonate ion
b.What would you expect the charge to be on each oxygen atom?
PROBLEM 4a.Which of the following compounds have delocalized electrons?
1.5.
2.6.
3.7.
4.b.Draw the contributing resonance structures for these compounds.
7.5Predicted Stabilities of Resonance Contributors
All resonance contributors do not necessarily contribute equally to the resonance hy-
brid. The degree to which each resonance contributor contributes depends on its pre-

dicted stability. Because resonance contributors are not real,their stabilities cannot be

measured. Therefore,the stabilities of resonance contributors have to be predicted

based on molecular features that are found in real molecules. 
The greater the predict-
ed stability of the resonance contributor,the more it contributes to the resonance hy-

brid;and the more it contributes to the resonance hybrid,the more similar the

contributor is to the real molecule
. The examples that follow illustrate these points.
The two resonance contributors for a carboxylic acid are labeled 
Aand B. StructureBhas separated charges. A molecule with 
separated charges
is a molecule with apositive charge and a negative charge that can be neutralized by the movement of elec-

trons. We can predict that resonance contributors with separated charges are relatively

unstable because it takes energy to keep opposite charges separated. Since structure 
Adoes not have separated charges,it is predicted to have a considerably greater stability.

Since structure Ais predicted to be more stable than structure B,structure 
Amakes a
greater contribution to the resonance hybrid; that is,the resonance hybrid looks more

like 
Athan like 
B.The two resonance contributors for a carboxylate ion are shown next.
COCRa carboxylate ionODOCROAOHCRa carboxylic acidOBOHCROseparatedchangesCH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH2NHCH2CHCH2OCH3CHCHCHCHCH2CH2NH2HNNH2(CO3 2).Section 7.5Predicted Stabilities of Resonance Contributors
273The greater the predicted stability
of the resonance contributor, the more it

contributes to the structure of the

resonance hybrid.
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 273
274CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryStructures Cand Dare predicted to be equally stable and therefore are expected to
contribute equally to the resonance hybrid.
When electrons can be moved in more than one direction,they are always moved
toward the more electronegative atom. For example,structure 
Gin the next exam-
ple results from moving the electrons toward oxygen
Ñthe most electronegative
atom in the molecule. Structure 
Eresults from moving the electrons away from
oxygen.We can predict that structure 
Gwill make only a small contribution to the resonance
hybrid because it has separated charges as well as an atom with an incomplete octet.

Structure Ealso has separated charges and an atom with an incomplete octet,but its
predicted stability is even less than that of structure 
Gbecause it has a positive charge
on the electronegative oxygen. Its contribution to the resonance hybrid is so insignifi-

cant that we do not need to include it as one of the resonance contributors. The reso-

nance hybrid,therefore,looks very much like structure 
F.The only time resonance contributors obtained by moving electrons away from the
more electronegative atom should be shown is when that is the only way the electrons

can be moved. In other words,movement of the electrons away from the more elec-

tronegative atom is better than no movement at all,because electron delocalization

makes a molecule more stable (Section7.6). For example,the only resonance contrib-

utor that can be drawn for the following molecule requires movement of the electrons

away from oxygen:
Structure Iis predicted to be relatively unstable because it has separated charges and
its most electronegative atom is the atom with the positive charge. Therefore,the struc-

ture of the resonance hybrid is similar to structure 
H,with only a small contribution
from structure I.Of the two contributing resonance structures for the enolate ion,structure 
Jhas anegative charge on carbon and structure 
Khas a negative charge on oxygen. Oxygen is
more electronegative than carbon,so oxygen can accommodate the negative charge

better. Consequently,structure 
Kis predicted to be more stable than structure J. Theresonance hybrid,therefore,more closely resembles structure 
K; that is,the resonance
hybrid has a greater concentration of negative charge on the oxygen atom than on the

carbon atom.JCHCH3RCOKan enolate ionCHCH3RCOIHCHCH2OCH3CHCH2OCH3pp3-D Molecule:An enolate ionresonance contributor obtainedby moving    electrons away

from the more electronegative atomresonance contributor obtainedby moving    electrons away

from the more electronegative atoman insignificantresonance contributorresonance contributor obtainedby moving    electrons toward

the more electronegative atomresonance contributor obtainedby moving    electrons toward

the more electronegative atomCHCH3CCH
2OFGECHOCH3CCH
2CHCH3CCH
2OBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 274
Section 7.6Resonance Energy
275We can summarize the features that decrease the predicted stability of a contributing
resonance structure as follows:
1.an atom with an incomplete octet
2.a negative charge that is not on the most electronegative atom or a positive
charge that is not on the least electronegative (most electropositive) atom
3.charge separation
When we compare the relative stabilities of contributing resonance structures,each of
which has only one of these features,an atom with an incomplete octet (feature 1) gen-

erally makes a structure more unstable than does either feature 2 or feature 3.
PROBLEM 5SOLVED
Draw contributing resonance structures for each of the following species,and rank the
structures in order of decreasing contribution to the hybrid:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
SOLUTION TO 5a
Structure Ais more stable than structure Bbecause the positive
charge is on a tertiary carbon in 
Aand on a secondary carbon in B.PROBLEM 6Draw the resonance hybrid for each of the species in Problem5.
7.6Resonance EnergyA compound with delocalized electrons is more stable than it would be if all of its
electrons were localized. The extra stability a compound gains from having delocal-

ized electrons is called delocalization energy
or resonance energy
. Electron delo-
calizationgives a compound 
resonance
,so saying that a compound is 
stabilized byelectron delocalization
is the same as saying that it isstabilized by resonance
. Sincethe resonance energy tells us how much more stable a compound is as a result of hav-

ing delocalized electrons,it is frequently called 
resonance stabilization
.To understand the concept of resonance energy better,let
Õs take a look at the reso-
nance energy of benzene. In other words,let
Õs see how much more stable benzene
(with three pairs of delocalized electrons) is than the unknown,unreal,hypothetical

compound Òcyclohexatriene
Ó(with three pairs of localized electrons).
The for the hydrogenation of cyclohexene,a compound with one localized
double bond,has been determined experimentally to be We would

then expect the for the hydrogenation of 
Òcyclohexatriene,
Óa hypotheticalH¡28.6 kcalmol.H¡ppCHCH3CH3CCH3CHCHCH3CH3CCH3CHABCH3CHCHCHCH3OCH3COCH3ONHCH3CH3COHOCHCH3CH3CCH3CHThe resonance energy is a measure of
how much more stable a compound

with delocalized electrons is than it

would be if its electrons were localized.
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 275
276CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryHû  85.8 kcal/mol(359 kJ/mol)Hû  49.8 kcal/mol(208 kJ/mol)36 kcal/mol(151 kJ/mol)Potential energyÒcyclohexatrieneÓ  3 H2cyclohexanebenzene  3 H2Figure 7.6
The difference in the energy levels
of ÒcyclohexatrieneÓhydrogenversus cyclohexane and the
difference in the energy levels of

benzenehydrogen versus

cyclohexane.compound with three localized double bonds,to be three times that of cyclohexene;
that is,(Section4.11).
When the for the hydrogenation of benzene was determined experimenally,it
was found to be much less than that calculated for hypothetical

Òcyclohexatriene.
ÓBecause the hydrogenation of Òcyclohexatriene
Óand the hydrogenation of benzeneboth form cyclohexane,the difference in the values can be accounted for only by

a difference in the energies of 
Òcyclohexatriene
Óand benzene. Figure7.6shows that
benzene must be (or ) more stable than 
Òcyclohexatriene
Óbecause the experimental for the hydrogenation of benzene is less

than that calculated for Òcyclohexatriene.
Ó36 kcalmolH¡151 kJmole36 kcalmolH¡benzene3 H2H 49.8 kcal/mol (208 kJ/mol)experimental49.8 kcalmol,H¡cyclohexeneH2H 28.6 kcal/mol (120 kJ/mol)ÒcyclohexatrieneÓhypothetical3 H2H 85.8 kcal/mol (359 kJ/mol)calculatedexperimental85.8 kcalmol328.6A resonance hybrid is more stable than
any of its resonance contributors is

predicted to be.
Because benzene and Òcyclohexatriene
Óhave different energies,they must be dif-
ferent compounds. Benzene has six delocalized electrons,whereas hypothetical

Òcyclohexatriene
Óhas six localized electrons. The difference in their energies is the
resonance energy of benzene. The resonance energy tells us 
how much more stable a
compound with delocalized electrons is than it would be if its electrons were localized.

Benzene,with six delocalized electrons,is more stable than hypotheti-

cal Òcyclohexatriene,
Ówith six localized electrons. Now we can understand why
nineteenth-century chemists,who didn
Õt know about delocalized electrons,were puz-
zled by benzeneÕs unusual stability (Section7.1).
Since the ability to delocalize electrons increases the stability of a molecule,we
can conclude that a resonance hybrid is more stable than the predicted stability of
any of its resonance contributors.
The resonance energy associated with a com-
pound that has delocalized electrons depends on the number 
andpredicted stabilityof the resonance contributors:
The greater the number of relatively stable resonance
p36 kcalmolpppBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 276
contributors
,the greater is the resonance energy
. For example,the resonance energy
of a carboxylate ion with two relatively stable resonance contributors is significantly

greater than the resonance energy of a carboxylic acid with only one relatively stable

resonance contributor.
Notice that it is the number of relatively stable
resonance contributors
Ñnot the
total number of resonance contributors
Ñthat is important in determining the reso-nance energy. For example,the resonance energy of a carboxylate ion with two rela-

tively stable resonance contributors is greater than the resonance energy of the

compound in the following example because even though this compound has three

resonance contributors,only one of them is relatively stable:
The more nearly equivalent the resonance contributors are in structure
,the greater
is the resonance energy
. The carbonate dianion is particularly stable because it has
three equivalent resonance contributors.
We can now summarize what we know about contributing resonance structures:
1.The greater the predicted stability of a resonance contributor,the more it con-
tributes to the resonance hybrid.
2.The greater the number of relatively stable resonance contributors,the greater is
the resonance energy.
3.The more nearly equivalent the resonance contributors,the greater is the reso-
nance energy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Which carbocation is more stable?Start by drawing the resonance contributors for each carbocation.
CH2orCH
CH3CH3CCH2CHCH3CHOOOCOOOOCOOCCHCH2CHCH2relatively unstableCHCH2CHCH2relatively unstableCHCH2CHCH
2relatively stableHrelatively stablerelatively stable
OHCROOCROrelatively unstablerelatively stableOHCROOCROresonance contributorsof a carboxylic acidresonance contributorsof a carboxylate ionSection 7.6Resonance Energy
277The greater the number of relatively
stable resonance contributors, the

greater is the resonance energy.
The more nearly equivalent the
resonance contributors are in structure,

the greater is the resonance energy.
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 277
Then compare the predicted stabilities of the set of resonance contributors for each
carbocation.Each carbocation has two resonance contributors. The positive charge of the carboca-
tion on the left is shared by a primary carbon and a secondary carbon. The positive charge

of the carbocation on the right is shared by a primary carbon and a tertiary carbon. Because

a tertiary carbon is more stable than a secondary carbon,the carbocation on the right is

more stableÑit has greater resonance energy.
Now continue on to Problem7.
PROBLEM 7Which species is more stable?7.7Stability of Allylic and Benzylic CationsAllylic and benzylic cations have delocalized electrons,so they are more stable than
similarly substituted carbocations with localized electrons. An 
allylic cationis a car-bocation with the positive charge on an allylic carbon; an 
allylic carbonis a carbonadjacent to an carbon of an alkene. A 
benzylic cationis a carbocation with thepositive charge on a benzylic carbon; a 
benzylic carbonis a carbon adjacent to an 
carbon of a benzene ring.The allyl cationis an unsubstituted allylic cation,and the 
benzyl cation
is an unsubsti-
tuted benzylic cation.An allylic cation has two resonance contributors. The positive charge is not localized
on a single carbon,but is shared by two carbons.
CH2RCHCH
CH2RCHCH
an allylic cationCH2CHCH2the allyl cationthe benzyl cationCH2CH2CHCHRan allylic cationan allylcarbona benzylic cationa benzylcarbonCHRsp2sp2278CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryorCH2CH3CH2CHCHCH
2CH3CH2CCH2orOOCH3CCHCHCH
3CH3CCHCH
2orCH3CCHCH
3CH3CHCHCH2or+NH2OÐOÐ+OHCH3CNH
2CH3CNH
2a.b.c.d.CH3CHCHCH
2CH3CHCHCH
2CH3CCHCH
2CH3CCHCH
2CH3CH3BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 278
A benzylic cation has five resonance contributors. Notice that the positive charge is
shared by four carbons.Not all allylic and benzylic cations have the same stability. Just as a tertiary alkyl
carbocation is more stable than a secondary alkyl carbocation,a tertiary allylic cation

is more stable than a secondary allylic cation,which in turn is more stable than the

(primary) allyl cation. Similarly,a tertiary benzylic cation is more stable than a

secondary benzylic cation,which is more stable than the (primary) benzyl cation.
Because the allyl and benzyl cations have delocalized electrons,they are more
stable than other primary carbocations. (Indeed,they have about the same stability as

secondary alkyl carbocations.) We can add the benzyl and allyl cations to the group of

carbocations whose relative stabilities were shown in Sections4.2 and 6.4.
Notice that it is the primarybenzyl and the 
primaryallyl cations that have about the
same stability as secondaryalkyl carbocations. Secondary benzylic and allylic cations,
as well as tertiary benzylic and allylic cations,are even more stable than primary

benzyl and allyl cations.PROBLEM 8Which carbocation in each of the following pairs is more stable?
a.orc.or
b.d.e.CHCH2orOCH3CH3OCHCCH2CH2orCHCH3CHCH3orCH3OCH2CH3OCH2CH2CH3NHCH2CH3OH2moststablemost
stableRRCH2CHCH2CHCHR
CRRCH2CHCH2tertiary allylic cationrelative stabilitiestertiary benzylic cationsecondary benzylic cation
secondary allylic cationallyl cationCCH benzyl cationCH2RSection 7.7Stability of Allylic and Benzylic Cations
2793-D Molecules:Allyl cation; Benzyl cationa benzylic cationCHRCHR
CHRCHRCHRRRRRRRCH2CH2CHCH2CH2CHCHCHHHCHHrelative stabilities of carbocationsCa tertiarycarbocationbenzylcationallylcationa secondarycarbocationa primarycarbocationvinylcationmethylcation
moststableleast
stableBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 279
280CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theory7.8Stability of Allylic and Benzylic RadicalsAn allylic radical has an unpaired electron on an allylic carbon and,like an allylic
cation,has two contributing resonance structures.
A benzylic radical has an unpaired electron on a benzylic carbon and,like a benzylic
cation,has five contributing resonance structures.
Because of their delocalized electrons,allyl and benzyl radicals are both more stable
than other primary radicals. They are even more stable than tertiary radicals.
7.9Some Chemical Consequencesof Electron Delocalization
Our ability to predict the correct product of an organic reaction often depends upon
recognizing when organic molecules have delocalized electrons. For example,in the

following reaction,both carbons of the alkene are bonded to the same number of

hydrogens:Therefore,the rule that tells us to add the electrophile to the carbon bonded to the
greater number of hydrogens (or Markovnikov
Õs rule that tells us where to add the pro-ton) predicts that approximately equal amounts of the two addition products will be

formed. When the reaction is carried out,however,only one of the products is obtained.
The rules lead us to an incorrect prediction of the reaction product because they do
not take electron delocalization into consideration. They presume that both carboca-

tion intermediates are equally stable since they are both secondary carbocations. The

rules do not take into account the fact that one intermediate is a secondary alkyl car-

bocation and the other is a secondary benzylic cation. Because the secondary benzylic
sp2100%0%
CHCH3HBrCHCHCH2CH3BrCH2CHCH3Brsp2CH2RCHCH
CH2RCHCH
an allylic radicala benzylic radicalCHRCHR
CHRCHRCHRbenzylradicalallylradicaltertiaryradicalsecondaryradicalCH2relative stabilities of radicalsCH2RCRRCHCH2CH2CH
RCHprimaryradicalvinylradicalmethylradicalRRCHHHCHHmoststableleast
stableBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 280
cation is stabilized by electron delocalization,it is formed more readily,so only one
product is obtained.This example serves as a warning. Neither the rule indicating which carbon the
electrophile becomes attached to nor Markovnikov
Õs rule can be used for reactions inwhich the carbocations can be stabilized by electron delocalization. In such cases,you

must look at the relative stabilities of the individual carbocations to predict the product

of the reaction.Here is another example of how electron delocalization can affect the outcome of a
reaction:The addition of a proton to the alkene forms a secondary alkyl carbocation. A carboca-
tion rearrangement occurs because a 1,2-hydride shift leads to a more stable secondary

benzylic cation (Section 4.6). It is electron delocalization that causes the benzylic
secondary cation to be more stable than the initially formed secondary carbocation. Had
we neglected electron delocalization,we would not have anticipated the carbocation re-

arrangement,and we would not have correctly predicted the product of the reaction.
The relative rates at which alkenes 
A,B,and 
Cundergo an electrophilic addition
reaction with a reagent such as HBr illustrate the effect that delocalized electrons can

have on the reactivity of a compound.
Ais the most reactive of the three alkenes. The addition of a proton to the carbon
bonded to the greater number of hydrogens
Ñrecall that this is the rate-limiting step ofan electrophilic addition reactionÑforms a carbocation intermediate with a positive
charge that is shared by carbon and oxygen. Being able to share the positive charge

with another atom increases the stability of the carbocation
Ñand,therefore,makes it
easier to form. In contrast,the positive charge on the carbocation intermediates formed

by Band Cis localized on a single atom.sp2relative reactivities toward addition of HBrCH2CCH3OCH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH2OCH3ABC
sp2CHCH2CH3a secondary benzylic cationCH2CHCH3a secondary carbocationCH2CHCH
2BrHBrcarbocationrearrangementa secondary carbocationa secondarybenzylic carbocationCHCHCH3CHCH2CH3CHCH2CH3BrHHBrBrCH2CCH3OCH3CH3CH3OCH3CH3CCH3OCH3CCH2CH3OCH3Cresonance electrondonationresonance electrondonationSection 7.9Some Chemical Consequences of Electron Delocalization
281BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 281
Breacts with HBr more rapidly than 
Cdoes,because the carbocation formed by 
Cisdestabilized by the group that withdraws electrons inductively (through the 

bonds) from the positively charged carbon of the carbocation intermediate.
Notice that the group in 
Ccan only withdraw electrons inductively,whereas the
group in Ais positioned so that in addition to withdrawing electrons inductive-
ly,it can donate a lone pair to stabilize the carbocation. This is called 
resonance
electron donation
. Because stabilization by resonance electron donation outweighsdestabilization by inductive electron withdrawal,the overall effect of the group

in Ais stabilization of the carbocation intermediate.PROBLEM 9SOLVED
Predict the sites on each of the following compounds where the reaction can occur:
a.c.
b.d.
SOLUTION TO 9a
The contributing resonance structures show that there are two sites
that can be protonated:the lone pair on oxygen and the lone pair on carbon.
7.10The Effect of Electron Delocalization on 
We have seen that a carboxylic acid is a much stronger acid than an alcohol because
the conjugate base of a carboxylic acid is considerably more stable than the conjugate
base of an alcohol (Section1.19). (Recall that the stronger the acid,the more stable is

its conjugate base.) For example,the of acetic acid is 4.76,whereas the of

ethanol is 15.9.CH3COHOacetic acidpKa  4.76CH3CH2OHethanolpKa  15.9papapKasites of reactivityCH3CHCHCH
3CHCHOCH
3OCH3CH3CHCHOCH
3resonance contributorsHNHOClBrCH3CHCHOCH3HOCH3OCH3OCH3HBrBrBrinductive electronwithdrawalHBrCH2CCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH2OCH3OCH3CH3CCCH3CH2CH3CH3CH3sOCH3282CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 282
Section 7.10The Effect of Electron Delocalization on 
283pKaFree energyProgress of the reactionRCO  HRO  HRCOHROHresonanceenergy
of RCOOHresonanceenergy
of RCOOOOFigure 7.7
One factor that makes a carboxylicacid more acidic than an alcohol is
the greater resonance energy of the
carboxylate ion, compared with
that of the carboxylic acid, which
increases the (and therefore

decreases the ).
pKaKaIn Section1.19,you saw that the difference in stability of the two conjugate bases
is attributable to two factors. First,the carboxylate ion has a double-bonded oxygen

atom in place of two hydrogens of the alkoxide ion. Electron withdrawal by the elec-

tronegative oxygen atom stabilizes the ion by decreasing the electron density of the

negatively charged oxygen.
The other factor responsible for the increased stability of the carboxylate ion is its
greater resonance energy
relative to that of its conjugate acid. The carboxylate ion has
greater resonance energy than a carboxylic acid does,because the ion has two equiva-

lent resonance contributors that are predicted to be relatively stable,whereas the car-

boxylic acid has only one (Section7.6). Therefore,loss of a proton from a carboxylic

acid is accompanied by an increase in resonance energy
Ñin other words,an increase
in stability (Figure7.7).
In contrast,all the electrons in an alcohol
Ñsuch as ethanolÑand its conjugate base
are localized,so loss of a proton from an alcohol is not accompanied by an increase in

resonance energy.
Phenol,a compound in which an OH group is bonded to an carbon of a benzene
ring,is a stronger acid than an alcohol such as ethanol or cyclohexanol,compounds 
sp2CH3CH2OHCH
3CH2OHethanolOOHCH3COOHCH3Crelatively stablerelatively unstableÐOCH3COOCH3Crelatively stableresonance contributors ofa carboxylic acidresonance contributors of
a carboxylate ionrelatively stableÐOÐCH3CH2Oa carboxylate ionan alkoxide ion
CH3COOElectron withdrawal increases the stabil-
ity of an anion.BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 283
284CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryTutorial:
Acidity and electron
delocalizationin which an OH group is bonded to an carbon. The same factors responsible for the
greater acidity of a carboxylic acid compared with an alcohol cause phenol to be more

acidic than an alcohol such as cyclohexanol
Ñstablization of phenolÕs conjugate baseby electron withdrawal
and by increased resonance energy.
The OH group of phenol is attached to an carbon that is more electonegative
than the carbon to which the OH group of cyclohexanol is attached

(Section6.9). Greater 
inductive electron withdrawal
by the carbon stabilizes the
conjugate base by decreasing the electron density of its negatively charged oxygen.

While both phenol and the phenolate ion have delocalized electrons,the resonance

energy of the phenolate ion is greater than that of phenol because three of phenol
Õsresonance contributors have separated charges. The loss of a proton from phenol,

therefore,is accompanied by an increase in resonance energy. In contrast,neither

cyclohexanol nor its conjugate base has delocalized electrons,so loss of a proton is

not accompanied by an increase in resonance energy.
Electron withdrawal from the oxygen in the phenolate ion is not as great as in the
carboxylate ion. In addition,the increased resonance energy resulting from loss of a

proton is not as great in a phenolate ion as in a carboxylate ion,where the negative

charge is shared equally by two oxygens. Phenol,therefore,is a weaker acid than a

carboxylic acid.Again,the same two factors can be invoked to account for why protonated aniline is
a stronger acid than protonated cyclohexylamine.
First,the nitrogen atom of aniline is attached to an carbon,whereas the nitro-
gen atom of cyclohexylamine is attached to a less electronegative carbon.

Second,the nitrogen atom of protonated aniline lacks a lone pair that can be delo-

calized. When it loses a proton,however,the lone pair that formerly held the proton

can be delocalized. Loss of a proton,therefore,is accompanied by an increase in res-

onance energy.
sp3sp2NH3protonated anilinepKa  4.60NH3protonated cyclohexylaminepKa  11.2HphenolOHOHOHOHOHphenolate ionOOOOOsp2sp3sp2OHCH
3CH2OHphenolpKa  10OHcyclohexanolpKa  16ethanolpKa  16sp3BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:31 AM  Page 284
ROHHRCOHH3ONH3OHRCOHRNH
3ROHH2OOOHTable 7.1
Approximate p
Ka Values
pKa    0p
Ka  5p
Ka  10p
Ka    15Section 7.10The Effect of Electron Delocalization on 
285pKaAn amine such as cyclohexylamine has no delocalized electrons either in the protonat-
ed form or in the unprotonated form,so proton loss is not associated with a change in

the amineÕs resonance energy.
We can now add phenol and protonated aniline to the classes of organic compounds
whose approximate values you should know (Table7.1). They are also listed in-

side the back cover for easy reference.
paHNH3NH2protonated anilineNH3NH3HanilineNH2NH2NH2NH2NH2PROBLEM 10SOLVED
Which of the following would you predict to be the stronger acid?
SOLUTIONThe nitro-substituted compound is the stronger acid because the nitro sub-
stituent can withdraw electrons inductively (through the bonds) and it can withdraw

electrons by resonance (through the bonds). We have seen that electron-withdrawing

substituents increase the acidity of a compound by stabilizing its conjugate base.psorCOOOHNCOH
OOOOOONONONONONCOH
OCOH
OCOH
OOCOH
OCOH
OONBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 285
286CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheoryPROBLEM 11Which is a stronger acid?a.or
b.c.or
d.PROBLEM 12Which is a stronger base?a.ethylamine or anilinec.phenolate ion or ethoxide ion
b.ethylamine or ethoxide ion 
PROBLEM 13Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing acid strength:
7.11A Molecular Orbital Description of StabilityWe have used contributing resonance structures to show why compounds are stabi-
lized by electron delocalization. Why compounds are stabilized by electron delocal-

ization can also be explained by molecular orbital (MO) theory.
In Section1.5,we saw that the two lobes of a 
porbital have opposite phases. We
also saw that when two in-phase 
porbitals overlap,a covalent bond is formed,and
when two out-of-phase 
porbitals overlap,they cancel each other and produce a node
between the two nuclei (Section1.6). A 
nodeis a region where there is zero probabil-
ity of finding an electron.
LetÕs review how the molecular orbitals of ethene are constructed. An MO de-
scription of ethene is shown in Figure7.8. The two 
porbitals can be either in-phase orout-of-phase. (The different phases are indicated by different colors.) Notice that the

number of orbitals is conserved
Ñthe number of molecular orbitals equals the numberof atomic orbitals that produced them. Thus,the two atomic 
porbitals of ethene over-
lap to produce two molecular orbitals. Side-to-side overlap of in-phase 
porbitals(lobes of the same color) produces a 
bonding molecular orbitaldesignated (theGreek letter psi). The bonding molecular orbital is lower in energy than the 
patomicorbitals,and it encompasses both carbons. In other words,each electron in the bonding

molecular orbital spreads over both carbon atoms.
Side-to-side overlap of out-of-phase 
porbitals produces an 
antibonding molecularorbital,which is higher in energy than the 
patomic orbitals. The antibonding
molecular orbital has a node between the lobes of opposite phases. The bonding MO

arises from constructive overlap
of the atomic orbitals,whereas the antibonding
MOarises from 
destructive overlap
. In other words,the overlap of in-phase orbitals
holds atoms together
Ñit is a bonding interactionÑwhereas the overlap of out-of-
phase orbitals pulls atoms apartÑit is an antibonding interaction.The electrons are placed in molecular orbitals according to the same rules that
govern the placement of electrons in atomic orbitals (Section1.2):the aufbau principle

(orbitals are filled in order of increasing energy),the Pauli exclusion principle (each
pc2,c1pOHCH2OHCOOH(CH3CH2O)orCH3CHCHNH
3CH3CH2CH2NH3CH3CHCHOHCH3CHCHCH2OHorOCH3COHOHCCH2OHCH3CHCHOHCH3CH2CH2OHTake a few minutes to review
Section1.6.
BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 286
orbital can hold two electrons of opposite spin),and Hund
Õs rule (an electron will
occupy an empty degenerate orbital before it will pair up with an electron that is al-

ready present in an orbital).1,3-Butadiene and 1,4-PentadieneThe electrons in 1,3-butadiene are delocalized over four carbons. In other

words,there are four carbons in the system. A molecular orbital description of

1,3-butadiene is shown in Figure7.9.
Each of the four carbons contributes one 
patomic orbital,and the four 
patomicorbitals combine to produce four molecular orbitals:and Thus,a

molecular orbital results from the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO)
.Half of the MOs are bonding MOs (and ),and the other half are antibonding
MOs (and ),and they are given the designations and in
order of increasing energy. The energies of the bonding and antibonding MOs are

symmetrically distributed above and below the energy of the 
patomic orbitals.Notice that as the MOs increase in energy,the number of nodes increases and the
number of bonding interactions decreases. The lowest-energy MO () has only 

the node that bisects the porbitalsÑit has no nodes between the nuclei because all theblue lobes overlap on one face of the molecule and all the green lobes overlap on 

the other face; has three bonding interactions; has one node between the nuclei

and two bonding interactions (for a net of one bonding interaction); has two nodes

between the nuclei and one bonding interaction (for a net of one antibonding interac-

tion); and has three nodes between the nuclei
Ñthree antibonding interactionsÑandno bonding interactions. The four electrons of 1,3-butadiene reside in and 
c2.c1pc4c3c2c1c1c4,c3,c2,c1,c4c3p*c2c1pc4.c3,c2,c1,ppsp2pSection 7.11A Molecular Orbital Description of Stability
287p atomic orbitalsout-of-phasein-phasemolecularorbitalsenergy levelspossiblealignmentof orbitalsnodedestructiveoverlapantibonding  * molecularorbitalenergy of the patomic orbitalsbonding   molecular

orbitalEnergy21constructive
overlapFigure 7.8
The distribution of electrons in ethene. Overlapping of in-phase porbitals produces abonding molecular orbital that is lower in energy than the patomic orbitals. Overlappingof out-of-phase porbitals produces an antibonding molecular orbital that is higher inenergy than the patomic orbitals.resonance contributorsresonance hybridCH2CH2CH2CHCHCH
CHCH2CHCHCH2CHCH
CH2CH2CH2BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 287
1,3-ButadieneÕs lowest-energy MO is particularly stable because it has three
bonding interactions and its two electrons are delocalized over all four nuclei
Ñthey
encompass all the carbons in the system. The MO next in energy () is also a bond-

ing MO because it has one more bonding interaction than antibonding interaction; it is

not as strongly bonding or as as low in energy as These two bonding MOs show

that the greatest electron density in a compound with two double bonds joined by

one single bond is between C-1 and C-2 and between C-3 and C-4,but there is some 

electron density between C-2 and C-3Ñjust as the resonance contributors show. They
also show why 1,3-butadiene is most stable in a planar confomation:If 1,3-butadiene

werenÕt planar,there would be little or no overlap between C-2 and C-3. Overall,is
an antibonding MO:It has one more antibonding interaction than bonding interaction,

but it is not as strongly antibonding as which has no bonding interactions and three

antibonding interactions.Both and are symmetric molecular orbitals; they have a plane of symmetry,
so one half is the mirror image of the other half. Both and are 
fully asymmetric;they do not have a plane of symmetry,but would have one if one half of the MO were

turned upside down. Notice that as the MOs increase in energy,they alternate from

being symmetric to asymmetric.c4c2c3c1c4,c3ppc1.c2pc1288CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theoryenergy of thep atomic orbitalsmolecular orbitals1,3 butadieneetheneenergy levelsnodeEnergy432121Figure 7.9
Four patomic orbitals overlap toproduce four molecular orbitals in
1,3-butadiene, and two patomicorbitals overlap to produce two
molecular orbitals in ethene. In
both compounds, the bonding MOs
are filled and the antibonding MOs
are empty.
symmetric molecular orbitalsfully asymmetric molecular orbitalsBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 288
The energies of the MOs of 1,3-butadiene and ethene are compared in Figure7.9.
Notice that the average energy of the electrons in 1,3-butadiene is lower than the

electrons in ethene. This lower energy is the resonance energy. In other words,1,3-

butadiene is stabilized by electron delocalization (resonance).
PROBLEM 14What is the total number of nodes in the and molecular orbitals of 1,3-butadiene?
The highest-energy molecular orbital of 1,3-butadiene that contains electrons is 
Therefore,is called the 
highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). The lowest-
energy molecular orbital of 1,3-butadiene that does not contain electrons is is

called the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO)
.The molecular orbital description of 1,3-butadiene shown in Figure7.9represents
the electronic configuration of the molecule in its ground state. If the molecule absorbs

light of an appropriate wavelength,the light will promote an electron from its HOMO

to its LUMO (from to ). The molecule then is in an excited state (Section1.2).

The excitation of an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO is the basis of ultraviolet

and visible spectroscopy (Section8.9).
PROBLEM 15Answer the following questions for the molecular orbitals of 1,3-butadiene:
a.Which are the bonding MOs and which are the antibonding MOs?
b.Which MOs are symmetric and which are asymmetric?

c.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the ground state?

d.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the excited state?

e.What is the relationship between the HOMO and the LUMO and symmetric and asym-
metric orbitals?Now let
Õs look at the molecular orbitals of 1,4-pentadiene.
1,4-Pentadiene,like 1,3-butadiene,has four electrons. However,unlike the delocal-
ized electrons in 1,3-butadiene,the electrons in 1,4-pentadiene are completely

separate from one another. In other words,the electrons are localized. The molecular

orbitals of 1,4-pentadiene have the same energy as those of ethene
Ña compound withone pair of localized electrons. Thus,molecular orbital theory and contributing res-

onance structures are two different ways to show that the electrons in 1,3-butadiene

are delocalized and that electron delocalization stabilizes a molecule.The Allyl Cation, the Allyl Radical, and the Allyl AnionLetÕs now look at the molecular orbitals of the allyl cation,the allyl radical,and the
allyl anion.The three patomic orbitals of the allyl group combine to produce three molecular
orbitals:and (Figure7.10). The bonding MO encompasses all the
c1c3c2,c1,pthe allyl cationCHCH2CH2the allyl anionCHCH2CH2the allyl radicalCHCH2CH2pppppCH21,4-pentadieneCHCH2CHCH2CH2ppc3c2c3c3;c2c2.c4c3Section 7.11A Molecular Orbital Description of Stability
289highest occupiedmolecular orbital.HOMOthelowest unoccupiedmolecular orbital.LUMOtheBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 289
290CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theorymolecular orbitalsallyl cationallyl radicalallyl anion
energy levelsenergy of thepatomic orbitalsEnergy321Figure 7.10
The distribution of electrons in themolecular orbitals of the allyl
cation, the allyl radical, and the allyl
anion. Three patomic orbitalsoverlap to produce three 
molecular orbitals.pcarbons in the system. In an acyclic system,the number of bonding MOs always
equals the number of antibonding MOs. Therefore,when there is an odd number of

MOs,one of them must be a 
nonbonding molecular orbital. In an allyl system,is
a nonbonding MO. We have seen that as the energy of the MO increases,the number

of nodes increases. Consequently,the MO must have a node
Ñin addition to the one
that has that bisects the 
porbitals. The only symmetrical position for a node in 
is for it to pass through the middle carbon. (You also know that it needs to pass through

the middle carbon because that is the only way can be fully asymmetric,which it

must be,since and are symmetric.)
You can see from Figure7.10why is called a nonbonding molecular orbital:
There is no overlap between the 
porbital on the middle carbon and the porbital on ei-ther of the end carbons. Notice that a nonbonding MO has the same energy as the iso-

lated patomic orbitals. The third molecular orbital is an antibonding MO.
The two electrons of the allyl cation are in the bonding MO,which means that
they are spread over all three carbons. Consequently,the two carbon
Ðcarbon bonds in
the allyl cation are identical,with each having some double-bond character. The posi-

tive charge is shared equally by the end carbon atoms,which is another way of show-

ing that the stability of the allyl cation is due to electron delocalization.The allyl radical has two electrons in the bonding molecular orbital,so these
electrons are spread over all three carbon atoms. The third electron is in the nonbond-

ing MO. The molecular orbital diagram shows that the third electron is shared equally

by the end carbons,with none of the electron density on the middle carbon. This is in

agreement with what the resonance contributors show:Only the end carbons have rad-

ical character.
Finally,the allyl anion has two electrons in the nonbonding MO. These two elec-
trons are shared equally by the end carbon atoms. This again agrees with what the res-

onance contributors show.
CH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH2resonance contributors of the allyl radicalresonance hybrid
CHCH2CH2pCH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH2resonance contributors of the allyl cationresonance hybrid
CHCH2CH2pc3c2c3c1c2c2c1c2c2ppBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 290
Section 7.11A Molecular Orbital Description of Stability
2911,3,5-Hexatriene and Benzene1,3,5-Hexatriene,with six carbon atoms,has six 
patomic orbitals.The six patomic orbitals combine to produce six molecular orbitals:
and (Figure7.11). Half of the MOs (and ) are bonding MOs,and the
other half (and ) are antibonding. 1,3,5-Hexatriene
Õs six electrons occupy
the three bonding MOs (and ),and two of the electrons (those in ) are de-

localized over all six carbons. Thus,molecular orbital theory and resonance contribu-

tors are two different ways of showing that the electrons in 1,3,5-hexatriene are

delocalized. Notice in the figure that as the MOs increase in energy,the number of

nodes increases,the number of bonding interactions decreases,and the MOs alternate

from being symmetric to being asymmetric.pc1c3c2,c1,pc6c5,c4,c3c2,c1,c6c5,c4,c3,c2,c1,p1,3,5-hexatrieneCH2CHCHCH
resonance hybrid of1,3,5-hexatrieneCHCH
CH2CH2CH2CHCHCH
CH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH2resonance contributors of the allyl anionresonance hybrid
CHCH
2CH2molecular orbitalsenergy levelsEnergy654321asymmetricsymmetricasymmetricsymmetricasymmetricsymmetricenergy of thep atomic orbitalsFigure 7.11
Six patomic orbitals overlap toproduce the six molecular orbitals

of 1,3,5-hexatriene. The six
electrons occupy the three bonding
molecular orbitals and 
c3 .c2 ,c1 ,pBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 291
292CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theory645231Energyenergy of the patomic orbitalsenergy levelsp atomic orbitals of benzeneFigure 7.12
Benzene has six molecular
orbitals, three bonding 
and three antibonding 
The six electrons occupy the three

bonding molecular orbitals.pc6).c5 ,(c4 ,c3)c2 ,(c1 ,pFigure7.13shows that there are 
sixbonding interactions in the lowest-energy MO
of benzeneÑone more than in the lowest-energy MO of 1,3,5-hexatriene
(Figure7.12). In other words,putting the three double bonds into a ring is accompa-

nied by an increase in stabilization. Each of the other two bonding MOs of benzene

(and ) has a node in addition to the node that bisects the 
porbitals. These two or-
bitals are degenerate:has four bonding interactions and two antibonding interac-

tions,for a net of two bonding interactions,and also has two bonding interactions.

Thus,and are bonding MOs,but they are not as strongly bonding as 
The energy levels of the MOs of ethene,1,3-butadiene,1,3,5-hexatriene,and benzene
are compared in Figure7.14. You can see that benzene is a particularly stable mole-

culeÑmore stable than 1,3,5-hexatriene and much more stable than a molecule with one
or more isolated double bonds. Compounds such as benzene that are unusually stable

because of large delocalization energies are called 
aromatic compounds
. The structural
features that cause a compound to be aromatic are discussed in Section15.1.
PROBLEM 17How many bonding interactions are there in the and molecular orbitals of the fol-
lowing compounds?
a.1,3-butadieneb.1,3,5,7-octatetraene
c2c1c1.c3c2c3c2c3c2c1PROBLEM 16Answer the following questions for the molecular orbitals of 1,3,5-hexatriene:
a.Which are the bonding MOs and which are the antibonding MOs?
b.Which MOs are symmetric and which are asymmetric?

c.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the ground state?

d.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the excited state?

e.What is the relationship between the HOMO and the LUMO and symmetric and asym-
metric orbitals.Like 1,3,5-hexatriene,benzene has a six-carbon system. The six-carbon sys-
tem in benzene,however,is cyclic. The six 
patomic orbitals combine to produce six molecular orbitals (Figure7.12). Three of the MOs are bonding (and ) and

three are antibonding (and ). Benzene
Õs six electrons occupy the three
lowest-energy MOs (the bonding MOs). The two electrons in are delocalized over

the six carbon atoms. The method used to determine the relative energies of the MOs

of compounds with cyclic systems is described in Section15.6.
pc1pc6c5,c4,c3c2,c1,ppppBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 292
Section 7.11A Molecular Orbital Description of Stability
293bondingantibondingEnergy645321Figure 7.13
As the energy of the molecular
orbitals increases, the number of
nodes increases and the net number
of bonding interactions decreases.penergy ofp atomicorbitalsethene1,3,5-hexatriene
1,3-butadienebenzene
EnergyFigure 7.14
A comparison of the energy levelsof the molecular orbitals of

ethene, 1,3-butadiene,
1,3,5-hexatriene, and benzene.pTutorial:
Common termsBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 293
294CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital TheorySummaryLocalized electrons
belong to a single atom or are confined
to a bond between two atoms. 
Delocalized electrons
areshared by more than two atoms; they result when a 
porbitaloverlaps the 
porbitals of more than one adjacent atom.Electron delocalization occurs only if all the atoms sharing

the delocalized electrons lie in or close to the same plane.Benzene is a planar molecule. Each of its six carbon atoms
ishybridized,with bond angles of 120
¡. A porbital ofeach carbon overlaps the 
porbitals of both adjacent carbons.The six electrons are shared by all six carbons. Compounds

such as benzene that are unusually stable because of large

delocalization energies
are called aromatic compounds
.Chemists use 
resonance contributors
Ñstructures withlocalized electronsÑto approximate the actual structure ofa compound that has delocalized electrons:the resonance
hybrid
. To draw resonance contributors,move only elec-
trons,lone pairs,or unpaired electrons toward an hy-

bridized atom. The total number of electrons and the

numbers of paired and unpaired electrons do not change.The greater the predicted stability
of the resonance contrib-utor,the more it contributes to the hybrid and the more similar it

is to the real molecule. The predicted stability is decreased by

(1)an atom with an incomplete octet,(2)a negative (positive)

charge not on the most electronegative (electropositive) atom,

or (3)charge separation. A resonance hybrid is more stable than

the predicted stability of any of its resonance contributors.
The extra stability a compound gains from having delo-
calized electrons is called resonance energy
. It tells us how
much more stable a compound with delocalized electrons is

than it would be if its electrons were localized. The greater

the number of relatively stable resonance contributors and

the more nearly equivalent they are,the greater is the reso-
sp2ppsp2nance energy of the compound. Allylic and benzylic cations
(and radicals) have delocalized electrons,so they are more

stable than similarly substituted carbocations (and radicals)
with localized electrons. Donation of a lone pair is called

resonance electron donation
.Electron delocalization can affect the nature of the prod-
uct formed in a reaction and the of a compound. A car-

boxylic acid and a phenol are more acidic than an alcohol

such as ethanol,and a protonated aniline is more acidic than

a protonated amine because electron withdrawal stabilizes

their conjugate bases and the loss of a proton is accompa-

nied by an increase in resonance energy.
A molecular orbitalresults from the linear combinationof atomic orbitals. The number of orbitals is conserved:The
number of molecular orbitals equals the number of atomic
orbitals that produced them. Side-to-side overlap of in-phase

porbitals produces a 
bonding molecular orbital,which is
more stable than the atomic orbitals. Side-to-side overlap of

out-of-phase porbitals produces an antibonding molecularorbital,which is less stable than the atomic orbitals. The
highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)is the high-
est-energy MO that contains electrons. The 
lowest unoccu-
pied molecular orbital (LUMO)is the lowest-energy MO
that does not contain electrons.As the MOs increase in energy,the number of 
nodesin-creases and the number of bonding interactions decreases,
and they alternate from being 
symmetricto asymmetric.When there is an odd number of molecular orbitals,one

must be a 
nonbonding molecular orbital. Molecular or-bital theoryand contributing resonance structures both
show that electrons are delocalized and that electron delo-

calization makes a molecule more stable.
paKey Terms
allylic carbon (p.278)
allylic cation (p.278)

antibonding molecular orbital (p.286)

aromatic compounds (p.292)

asymmetric molecular orbital (p.288)

benzylic carbon (p.278)

benzylic cation (p.278)

bonding molecular orbital (p.286)

contributing resonance structure (p.267)

delocalization energy (p.275)
delocalized electrons (p.263)
electron delocalization (p.275)

highest occupied molecular orbital(HOMO) (p.289)
linear combination of atomic orbitals(LCAO) (p.287)
localized electrons (p.263)

lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
(LUMO) (p.289)
nonbonding molecular orbital (p.290)
resonance (p.275)
resonance contributor (p.267)

resonance electron donation (p.282)

resonance energy (p.275)

resonance hybrid (p.268)

resonance structure (p.267)

separated charges (p.273)

symmetric molecular orbital (p.288)
Problems
18.Which of the following compounds have delocalized electrons?
a.b.c.
CH2OCHCCH3BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 294
Problems295d.h.l.
e.i.m.
f.j.
g.k.
19.a.Draw resonance contributors for the following species,showing all the lone pairs:
1.2.3.
b.For each species,indicate the most stable resonance contributor.
20.Draw resonance contributors for the following ions:
a.b.c.d.
21.Are the following pairs of structures resonance contributors or different compounds?
a.d.
b.e.and
c.22.a.Draw resonance contributors for the following species. Do not include structures that are so unstable that their contribut
ions tothe resonance hybrid would be negligible. Indicate which species are major contributors and which are minor contributors to

the resonance hybrid.1.7.13.
2.8.14.
3.9.15.
4.10.16.
5.11.17.
6.12.18.
b.Do any of the species have resonance contributors that all contribute equally to the resonance hybrid?
OCH2COCH2CH3CHCH2OHCCHOOCH3NOCH3CCHCCH3OCO3 2OCH3ClCH3CHCHCH
2CH2CHHCNHCH3OCH3CHCNOOCH3CHN
CHCH2CHCHCH3CHCH2NH2CH3CH2COCH2CH3OCH3CHCHOCH3OHCH3CCHCH
3OCH3CCH2CH3andCH3CHCHCH2CH2CH3CHCHCHCH3CH2CHCHCHCH3CHCH2CHCHCH3CHCHandandOandONO2 N2OCH2N2CH2CH3CH3CCH2CHCH3CHCHOCH2CH3CH3CH2NHCHCHCH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH2CHCHCH2CH3CH2NHCH2CHCHCH3BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 295
296CHAPTER 7
Electron Delocalization and Resonance¥ More About Molecular Orbital Theory23.Which resonance contributor makes the greater contribution to the resonance hybrid?
a.or
b.c.
24.a.Which oxygen atom has the greater electron density?
b.Which compound has the greater electron density on its nitrogen atom?
c.Which compound has the greater electron density on its oxygen atom?
25.Which can lose a proton more readily,a methyl group bonded to cyclohexane or a methyl group bonded to benzene?
26.The triphenylmethyl cation is so stable that a salt such as triphenylmethyl chloride can be isolated and stored. Why is this
carbocation so stable?27.Draw the contributing resonance structures for the following anion,and rank them in order of decreasing stability:
28.Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing acidity:
29.Which species is more stable?
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
orOONONorOOCH3CHCH2CCH3CH3CH2CHCCH3orOCH3CCH
CH3CH2CH3CCH
CH3orOOOOCH3CCHCH2CHCH
3CCHCCH3orNH2NHCH3CHCH3CH3CNH2orOCH3CH2OCH3COCCH
OCH3CH2OCNCCltriphenylmethyl chlorideCH3CH3NHCCH3ONHCCH3OorNHorNHCH3COCH3OOorOCH3orCH3CH3CHCHCH2CH3CHCHCH2BRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 296
Problems29730.Which species in each of the pairs in Problem29 is the stronger base?
31.We saw in Chapter6 that ethyne reacts with an equivalent amount of HCl to form vinyl chloride. In the presence of excess HCl
,the
final reaction product is 1,1-dichloroethane. Why is 1,1-dichloroethane formed rather than 1,2-dichloroethane?
32.Why is the resonance energy of pyrrole greater than the resonance energy of furan 
33.Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing acidity of the indicated hydrogen:
34.Explain why the electrophile adds to the carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens in reaction 
a,but not in reaction 
b.a.b.
35.The acid dissociation constant for loss of a proton from cyclohexanol is 
a.Draw an energy diagram for loss of a proton from cyclohexanol.
b.Draw the contributing resonance structures for phenol.
c.Draw the contributing resonance structures for the phenolate ion.

d.Draw an energy diagram for loss of a proton from phenol on the same plot with the energy diagram for loss of a proton from
cyclohexanol.
e.Which has a greater cyclohexanol or phenol?
f.Which is a stronger acid,cyclohexanol or phenol?
36.Protonated cyclohexylamine has a Using the same sequence of steps as in Problem35,determine which is a
stronger base,cyclohexylamine or aniline.
37.Answer the following questions for the molecular orbitals of 1,3,5,7-octatetraene:
a.How many MOs does the compound have?

b.Which are the bonding MOs and which are the antibonding MOs?

c.Which MOs are symmetric and which are asymmetric?

d.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the ground state?

e.Which MO is the HOMO and which is the LUMO in the excited state?

f.What is the relationship between HOMO and LUMO and symmetric and asymmetric orbitals?

g.How many nodes does the highest-energy molecular orbital of 1,3,5,7-octatetraene have between the nuclei?
pppNH3NH2HNH3NH2Ha11011.a,OHOHKa 1  1016OHOH11016.aCH2CHCF3HFFCH2CH2CF3CH2CHFHF
CH3CHF2sp2OOCH3CCH2CH2CCH3OOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CCH3OOCH3CCH2CCH3furanpyrrole
NHO(16 kcalmol)?(21 kcalmol)HCCHH
2CCH
3CHCl2CHClHClHClBRUI07-263_297r4  21-03-2003  11:32 AM  Page 297
retinol
vitamin AIn thischapter,
we will look at the
reactions of compounds
that have two double bonds. Hydrocarbons

with two double bonds are called 
dienes,and
those with three double bonds are called 
trienes. Tetraenes
have four double bonds,
and polyenes
have many double bonds. Although we will be concerned mainly with
the reactions of dienes,the same considerations apply to hydrocarbons that contain

more than two double bonds.
Double bonds can be 
conjugated,isolated,or 
cumulated. Conjugated doublebondsare separated by one single bond. 
Isolated double bondsare separated by morethan one single bond. In other words,the double bonds are isolated from each other.

Cumulated double bondsare adjacent to each other. Compounds with cumulated
double bonds are called allenes.  -cadineneoil of citronellaa dienezingibereneoil of gingera triene-selineneoil of celerya diene-carotenea polyene2988Reactions of Dienes ¥Ultraviolet and Visible
SpectroscopyBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 298
Section 8.1Nomenclature of Alkenes with More than One Functional Group
2998.1Nomenclature of Alkenes with More 
than One Functional Group
To arrive at the systematic name of a diene,we first identify the longest continuous
chain that contains both double bonds by its alkane name and then replace the ÒneÓ

ending with Òdiene.ÓThe chain is numbered in the direction that gives the double

bonds the lowest possible numbers. The numbers indicating the locations of the dou-

ble bonds are cited either before the name of the parent compound or before the suffix.

Substituents are cited in alphabetical order. Propadiene,the smallest member of the

class of compounds known as allenes,is frequently called allene.
To name an alkene in which the second functional group is not another double
bondÑand is named with a functional group suffixÑchoose the longest continuous

chain containing both functional groups,and cite both designations at the end of the

name. The ÒeneÓending is cited first,with the terminal ÒeÓomitted in order to avoid

two adjacent vowels. The location of the first cited functional group is usually given

before the name of the parent chain. The location of the second functional group is

cited immediately before its suffix.
If the functional groups are a double bondand a triple bond,the chain is numbered
in the direction that yields the lowest number in the name of the compound. Thus,the

lower number is given to the alkene suffix in the compound on the left and to the

alkyne suffix in the compound on the right.
CH2CH2Cpropadieneallenesystematic:common:CH2CHCH
2BrC43214653212-methyl-1,3-butadieneor2-methylbuta-1,3-dieneisoprene5-bromo-1,3-cyclohexadieneor5-bromocyclohexa-1,3-dieneCH3CHCH
2CHCH2C1234562-methyl-1,4-hexadieneor2-methylhexa-1,4-dieneCH3CH3CCCH
2CH3CHCH76543215-ethyl-2-methyl-2,4-heptadieneor5-ethyl-2-methylhepta-2,4-dieneCH2CH3CH3CH3CHCH
CH3CHCHCH
3CHCH
2CHCH2CH2a conjugated dieneCHCH
CCH3CH3a cumulated dienean allenean isolated dienedouble bonds areseparated by one 
single bonddouble bonds areseparated by more
than one single bonddouble bondsare adjacentBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 299
CCC
COHNH
2the double bond is given priority overa triple bond only when there is a tie
increasing priorityCOTable 8.1
Priorities of Functional Group Suffixes
300CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
If there is a tie between a double bond
and a triple bond, the double bond gets
the lower number.
A chain is numbered to give the lowest
possible number to the functional group

with the highest priority.
If the same low number is obtained in both directions,the chain is numbered in the di-
rection that gives the double bond the lower number.
The relative priorities of the functional group suffixes are shown in Table8.1. If the
second functional group suffix has a higher priority than the alkene,the chain is num-

bered in the direction that assigns the lowest possible number to the functional group

with the higher priority.
CH3OH6-methyl-2-cyclohexenolNH23-cyclohexenamineCH3CCHCH
2CH2OH4-methyl-3-penten-1-olCH2CHCH2OH2-propen-1-olnot 1-propen-3-olNH2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CHCH36-hepten-2-amineCH3CHCCH
3CHC5643212-hexen-4-ynenot 4-hexen-2-yneHCCCH
2CH2CHCH
22134561-hexen-5-ynenot 5-hexen-1-yneCH3CHCH
CHCH2CH2C12345675-hepten-1-ynenot 2-hepten-6-ynebecause 1  2CH2CCH3CHCH2CH2C65432711-hepten-5-ynenot 6-hepten-2-ynebecause 1  2CH2CCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CHCHC123456
3-butyl-1-hexen-4-ynethe longest continuous chain has eight carbons, but the 8-carbon chain does not contain both functional groups; therefore, the
compound is named as a hexenyne because the longest continuous 
chain containing both functional groups has six carbonsHOW A BANANA SLUG KNOWS WHAT TO EAT
Many species of mushrooms synthesize 1-octen-3-ol,which serves as a repel-
lent that drives off predatory slugs. Such mushrooms can be recognized by
small bite marks on their caps,where the slug started to nibble before the volatile compound

was released. Humans are not put off by the smell because,to them,1-octen-3-ol smells like

a mushroom. 1-Octen-3-ol also has antibacterial properties that may protect the mushroom

from organisms that attempt to invade the wound made by the slug. Not surprisingly,the

species of mushroom that banana slugs commonly eat cannot synthesize 1-octen-3-ol.When the functional groups are a
double bond and a triple bond, the
chain is numbered to get the lowest

possible number in the name of the
compound, regardless of which

functional group gets the lower number.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCHCH
2OH1-octen-3-olBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 300
Section 8.3Relative Stabilities of Dienes
301PROBLEM 1Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
8.2Configurational Isomers of DienesA diene such as 1-chloro-2,4-heptadiene has four configurational isomers because
each of the double bonds can have either the 
Eor the Zconfiguration. Thus,there are
E-E,Z-Z,E-Z,and 
Z-Eisomers. The rules for determining the 
Eand Zconfigurations
were given in Section3.5. Recall that the 
Zisomer has the high-priority groups on thesame side.PROBLEM 2Draw the configurational isomers for the following compounds,and name each one:
a.2-methyl-2,4-hexadieneb.2,4-heptadienec.1,3-pentadiene
8.3Relative Stabilities of DienesIn Section4.11,we saw that the relative stabilities of substituted alkenes can be deter-
mined by their relative values of for catalytic hydrogenation. Remember that

the least stable alkene has the greatest value; the least stable alkene gives off

the most heat when it is hydrogenated,because it has more energy to begin with. The
for hydrogenation of 2,3-pentadiene (a cumulated diene) is greater than that ofH¡H¡H¡CCCCH2CH3ClCH2HHCClCH2CHH(2Z,4Z)-1-chloro-2,4-heptadieneCCCCH2CH3HHHH(2Z,4E)-1-chloro-2,4-heptadieneCCCCH2CH3HClCH2HHCH(2E,4Z)-1-chloro-2,4-heptadieneCCCCH2CH3HClCH2HHCH(2E,4E)-1-chloro-2,4-heptadieneCH3CHCCH
2CHCH2OHCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCCH
2CH2CCHCH
2CHCH2CH3CHCHCH
CHCHCH2CH3CHCCH
2CHCH3HOCH2CH2CCH
CH2CHCH2CCCH
2CH3CH3CH3The Zisomer has the high-prioritygroups on the same side.
Molecules:(1Z,3Z)-1,4-Difluoro-1,3-butadiene;
(1E,3E)-1,4-Difluoro-1,3-butadiene;
(1Z,3E)-1,4-Difluoro-1,3-butadieneThe least stable alkene has the greatest
value.H¡BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 301
302CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
3-D Molecules:2,3-Pentadiene;
1,4-Pentadiene;
1,3-PentadieneTutorial:
Orbitals used to form
carbonÐcarbon single bonds1,4-pentadiene (an isolated diene) which,in turn,is greater than than that of 1,3-
pentadiene (a conjugated diene).From the relative values for the three pentadienes,we can conclude that con-
jugated dienes are more stable than isolated dienes,which are more stable than cumu-

lated dienes.Why is a conjugated diene such as 1,3-pentadiene more stable thanan isolated diene?
Two factors contribute to the stability of a conjugated diene. One is the 
hybridization of theorbitalsforming the carbonÐcarbon single bonds. The carbon
Ðcarbon single bond in1,3-butadiene is formed from the overlap of an orbital with another orbital,where-

as the carbonÐcarbon single bonds in 1,4-pentadiene are formed from the overlap of an 
orbital with an orbital.
In Section1.14,you saw that the length and strength of a bond depend on how close
the electrons in the bonding orbital are to the nucleus:
The closer the electrons are to
the nucleus,the shorter and stronger is the bond
. Because a 2selectron is closer,on
average,to the nucleus than is a 2
pelectron,a bond formed by overlap is
shorter and stronger than one formed by overlap (Table8.2). (An orbital

has 33.3% scharacter,whereas an orbital has 25% 
scharacter.) Thus,a conjugat-
ed diene has one stronger single bond than an isolated diene,and stronger bonds cause

a compound to be more stable.Electron delocalization
also causes a conjugated diene to be more stable than an
isolated diene. The electrons in each of the double bonds of an isolated diene are

localizedbetween two carbons. In contrast,the electrons in a conjugated diene are
delocalized. As you discovered in Section7.6,electron delocalization stabilizes a mol-
ecule. Both the resonance hybrid and the molecular orbital diagram of 1,3-butadiene in

Figure7.9show that the single bond in 1,3-butadiene is not a pure single bond,but has

partial double-bond character as a result of electron delocalization.CH2CH2CHCHresonance hybridCHCH
CH2CH2CHCH
CH2CH2CHCH
CH2CH2resonance contributorsdelocalizedelectronsppsp3sp2sp3Ðsp2sp2Ðsp2CHCHCH
CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH21,3-butadiene1,4-pentadiene
single bonds formed bysp3sp2 overlapsingle bond formed bysp2sp2 overlapsp2sp3sp2sp2conjugated dienerelative stabilities of dienesisolated dienecumulated dieneleast stablemost 
stableH¡2,3-pentadienea cumulated diene1,4-pentadienean isolated dieneCCH
3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CHCHCH
32 H2Pt H¼ H¼ H¼ 70.5 kcal/mol (295 kJ/mol)CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH22 H2Pt 60.2 kcal/mol (252 kJ/mol)1,3-pentadienea conjugated dieneCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CHCHCHCH32 H2Pt 54.1 kcal/mol (226 kJ/mol)BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 302
PROBLEM 3Name the following dienes and rank them in order of increasing stability. (Alkyl groups
stabilize dienes in the same way that they stabilize alkenes; see Section4.11.)
We have just seen that a conjugated diene is 
more
stable than an isolated diene.Now we need to see why a cumulated diene is 
lessstable than an isolated diene. Cu-
mulated dienes are unlike other dienes in that the central carbon is 
sphybridizedsince it has two bonds. In contrast,all the double-bonded carbons of isolated dienes

and conjugated dienes are hybridized. The 
sphybridization gives the cumulated
dienes unique properties. For example,the for hydrogenation of allene is sim-

ilar to the for the hydrogenation of propyne,a compound with two 
sphy-bridized carbons.Allenes have an unusual geometry. One of the 
porbitals of the central carbon of al-lene overlaps a 
porbital of an adjacent carbon. The second 
porbital of the centralcarbon overlaps a 
porbital of the other carbon (Figure8.1a). The two 
porbitals ofthe central carbon are perpendicular. Therefore,the plane containing one 

group is perpendicular to the plane containing the other group. Thus,a

substituted allene such as 2,3-pentadiene has a nonsuperimposable mirror image

(Figure8.1b),so it is a chiral molecule,even though it does not have any asymmetric

carbons (Section5.4). We will not consider the reactions of cumulated dienes,because

they are rather specialized and are more appropriately covered in an advanced course

in organic chemistry.
HCHHCHsp2sp2allenepropyneCCH
3CH2CH3CH2CH22 H2PtH¼70.5 kcal/mol (295 kJ/mol)CH3CH2CH3CH3CCH2 H
2PtH¼ 
69.9 kcal/mol (292 kJ/mol)H¡H¡sp2pSection 8.3Relative Stabilities of Dienes
303Table 8.2   Dependence of the Length of a CarbonÐCarbon Single Bond on
the Hybridization of the Orbitals Used in Its FormationCompoundHybridization
Bond length (†)H3CCH
31.541.50
1.471.461.431.37sp3sp3sp3sp2sp2sp2sp3spsp2spspspCH3CCH
2HCH3CCH
CH2CCH
2HCHCH2CCH
HCCHCCH
CCHCHCH3CHCHCH
3CHCH2CHCHCH
CH2CH2CH3CCCH
3CH3CHCH
2CH3CHCHCH3BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 303
304CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Cb.a.CHCHHHCH3HH3CHCCCCH3HH3CHCCCFigure 8.1
(a)Double bonds are formed by 
porbitalÐporbital overlap. The two porbitals on thecentral carbon are perpendicular, causing allene to be a nonplanar molecule.

(b)2,3-Pentadiene has a nonsuperimposable mirror image. It is, therefore, a chiral

molecule, even though it does not have an asymmetric carbon.8.4How Dienes ReactDienes,like alkenes and alkynes,are nucleophiles because of the electron density of
their bonds. Therefore,they react with electrophilic reagents. Like alkenes and

alkynes,dienes undergo electrophilic addition reactions.
Until now,we have been concerned with the reactions of compounds that have only
one functional group. Compounds with two or more functional groups exhibit reac-

tions characteristic of the individual functional groups if the groups are sufficiently

separated from each other. If they are close enough to allow electron delocalization,

however,one functional group can affect the reactivity of the other. Therefore,we will

see that the reactions of isolated dienes are the same as the reactions of alkenes,but the

reactions of conjugated dienes are a little different because of electron delocalization.
8.5Electrophilic Addition Reactions
of Isolated DienesThe reactions of isolated dienes are just like those of alkenes. If an excess of the elec-
trophilic reagent is present,two independent addition reactions will occur,each fol-

lowing the rule that applies to all electrophilic addition reactions:The electrophile

adds to the carbon that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens.
The reaction proceeds exactly as we would predict from our knowledge of the mecha-
nism for the reaction of alkenes with electrophilic reagents. The electrophile 

adds to the electron-rich double bond in a manner that produces the more stable car-

bocation (Section4.4). The bromide ion then adds to the carbocation. Because there is

an excess of the electrophilic reagent,both double bonds undergo addition.
(H)CH2CHCH2CH2CHCH2CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3HBrBrBr1,5-hexadieneexcesssp2pCH2CHCH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH
3CHCH2CH2CHHBrHCH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3BrBrBrmechanism for the reaction of 1,5-hexadiene with excess HBrBrBrBrBrBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 304
If there is only enough electrophilic reagent to add to one of the double bonds,it
will add preferentially to the more reactive double bond. For example,in the reaction

of 2-methyl-1,5-hexadiene with HCl,addition of HCl to the double bond on the left

forms a secondary carbocation,whereas addition of HCl to the double bond on the

right forms a tertiary carbocation. Because the transition state leading to formation of
a tertiary carbocation is more stable than that leading to a secondary carbocation,the

tertiary carbocation is formed faster (Section4.4). So in the presence of a limited

amount of HCl,the major product of the reaction will be 5-chloro-5-methyl-1-hexene.
PROBLEM 4Which of the double bonds in zingiberene (whose structure is given on the first page of this
chapter) is the most reactive in an electrophilic addition reaction?
PROBLEM 5What stereoisomers are obtained from the two reactions in Section8.5? (
Hint:Review
Section5.19.)
PROBLEM 6Give the major product of each of the following reactions,and show the stereoisomers that

would be obtained (equivalent amounts of reagents are used in each case):
a.c.
b.d.
8.6Electrophilic Addition Reactions
of Conjugated DienesIf a conjugated diene,such as 1,3-butadiene,reacts with a limited amount of elec-
trophilic reagent so that addition can occur at only one of the double bonds,two addi-

tion products are formed. One is a 1,2-addition product,which is a result of addition at

the 1-and 2-positions. The other is a 1,4-addition product,the result of addition at the

1-and 4-positions.
CHCH2CH2CCH2CH2CH3HBrperoxideCCH2CH2CHCH
2HCCl2CHCH2CH2CHCH2CCH3CH3HBrHClCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CCH2CH2CHCH2CH2CCH3HClCl2-methyl-1,5-hexadiene1 mol5-chloro-5-methyl-1-hexenemajor product1 molCH3CH3Section 8.6Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Conjugated Dienes
305CH2CHCH
CH2Cl21,3-butadiene1 mol3,4-dichloro-1-butene1,2-addition product1,4-dichloro-2-butene1,4-addition product 1 molCH2CH2CHCHCH
2CH2CHCH
ClCH2CHCH
CH2HBr1,3-butadiene1 mol1 molCH3CHCHCH
2CH2CHCHCH3BrBr3-bromo-1-butene1,2-addition product1-bromo-2-butene1,4-addition product ClClClBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 305
306CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Addition at the 1-and 2-positions is called 
1,2-additionor direct addition
. Additionat the 1-and 4-positions is called 
1,4-additionor conjugate addition. On the basis ofour knowledge of how electrophilic reagents add to double bonds,we expect the

1,2-addition product to form. That the 1,4-addition product also forms may be surpris-

ing because not only did the reagent not add to adjacent carbons,but a double bond

has changed its position. The double bond in the 1,4-product is between the 2-and

3-positions,while the reactant had a single bond in this position.
When we talk about addition at the 1-and 2-positions or at the 1-and 4-positions,
the numbers refer to the four carbons of the conjugated system. Thus,the carbon in the

1-position is one of the carbons at the end of the conjugated system
Ñit is not nec-
essarily the first carbon in the molecule.
To understand why both 1,2-addition and 1,4-addition products are obtained from
the reaction of a conjugated diene with a limited amount of electrophilic reagent,we

must look at the mechanism of the reaction. In the first step of the addition of HBr to

1,3-butadiene,the electrophilic proton adds to C-1,forming an allylic cation. (Recall

that an allylic cation has a positive charge on a carbon that is next to a double-bonded

carbon.) The electrons of the allylic cation are delocalized
Ñthe positive charge is
shared by two carbons. Notice that because 1,3-butadiene is symmetrical,adding to

C-1 is the same as adding to C-4. The proton does not add to C-2 or C-3 because doing

so would form a primary carbocation. The electrons of a primary carbocation are lo-

calized; thus,it is not as stable as the delocalized allylic cation.
The contributing resonance structures of the allylic cation show that the positive charge
on the carbocation is not localized on C-2,but is shared by C-2 and C-4. Consequently,

in the second step of the reaction,the bromide ion can attack either C-2 (direct addition)

or C-4 (conjugate addition) to form the 1,2-addition product or the 1,4-addition product,

respectively.
As we look at more examples,notice that the first step in all electrophilic additions to
conjugated dienes is addition of the electrophile to one of the carbons at the end of

the conjugated system. This is the only way to obtain a carbocation that is stabilized by

resonance (i.e.,by electron delocalization). If the electrophile were to add to one of the

internal carbons,the resulting carbocation would not be stabilized by resonance.
sp2sp2ppsp2Br2CHCHCH
3CH3CHCH
CH3CHCHCH
3CHCH
CH3CHCHCHCHCH
32,4-hexadieneRCHCHCHCH
4,5-dibromo-2-hexene1,2-addition product2,5-dibromo-3-hexene1,4-addition product BrR1234
the conjugated systemBrBrBran allylic cationa primarycarbocationCH2CHCH
2CHCH2CHHBrCH2CHCH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH3Br1,3-butadiene3-bromo-1-butene1,2-addition product1-bromo-2-butene1,4-addition productmechanism for the reaction of 1,3-butadiene with HBrCHCH
2CHCH3BrBrBrCHCH3CHCH3CH2CHÐÐCH
CH3CHCH
2BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 306
Section 8.6Electrophilic Addition Reactions of Conjugated Dienes
307LetÕs review by comparing addition to an isolated diene with addition to a conjugated
diene. The carbocation formed by addition of an electrophile to an isolated diene is not

stabilized by resonance. The positive charge is localized on a single carbon,so only di-

rect (1,2) addition occurs.The carbocation formed by addition of an electrophile to a conjugated diene,in contrast,
is stabilized by resonance. The positive charge is shared by two carbons,and as a result,

both direct (1,2-) and conjugate (1,4-) addition occur.
If the conjugated diene is not symmetrical,the major products of the reaction are
those obtained by adding the electrophile to whichever terminal carbon results in for-

mation of the more stable carbocation. For example,in the reaction of 2-methyl-1,3-

butadiene with HBr,the proton adds preferentially to C-1 because the positive charge on

the resulting carbocation is shared by a tertiary allylic and a primary allylic carbon.

Adding the proton to C-4 would form a carbocation with the positive charge shared by a

secondary allylic and a primary allylic carbon. Because addition to C-1 forms the more

stable carbocation,3-bromo-3-methyl-1-butene and 1-bromo-3-methyl-2-butene are the

major products of the reaction.CHCH2CH22-methyl-1,3-butadieneCH3CH2CCH3CH33-bromo-3-methyl-1-butene1-bromo-3-methyl-2-buteneCH3CH3BrBrCHCH
2CHBr14CHCH3CCH
2carbocation formed by adding H+ to C-1CH3CHCH3CCH3CH2CCH2CHCH3carbocation formed by adding H+ to C-4CH3CCH2CH3CHCH3CCHsp2BrCHCH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH
3CHCH2CH2CHCH2HBr  BrCH21,5-hexadiene5-bromo-1-hexeneaddition to an isolated dieneaddition ofthe electrophileaddition of
the nucleophileHBrBrÐBrÐ2,4-hexadiene2-bromo-3-hexene1,4-addition productBr4-bromo-2-hexene1,2-addition productaddition to a conjugated dieneCHCHCH3CHCHCH
3CHCH3CH2CHCH3CHBrCHCH3CH2CHCH3CHCHCHCH3CH2CHCH3CHCHCH3CH2CHCH3the carbocation isstabilized by electron
delocalizationaddition of
the electrophileaddition of the nucleophileAn isolated diene undergoesonly 1,2-addition.A conjugated dieneundergoes both
1,2-and 1,4-addition.
BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 307
308CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
The thermodynamic product is the most
stable product.
The kinetic product is the product that is
formed most rapidly.
Tutorial:
Thermodynamic product
versus kinetic productPROBLEM 7What products would be obtained from the reaction of 1,3,5-hexatriene with one equiva-
lent of HBr? Ignore stereoisomers.PROBLEM 8Give the products of the following reactions,ignoring stereoisomers (equivalent amounts

of reagents are used in each case):a.c.
b.d.
8.7Thermodynamic Versus Kinetic Control
of ReactionsWhen a conjugated diene undergoes an electrophilic addition reaction,two factors
Ñthe temperature at which the reaction is carried out and the structure of the 

reactantÑdetermine whether the 1,2-addition product or the 1,4-addition product willbe the major product of the reaction.When a reaction produces more than one product,the product that is formed most
rapidly is called the kinetic product
,and the most stable product is called the
thermodynamic product
. Reactions that produce the kinetic product as the major
product are said to be 
kinetically controlled
. Reactions that produce the thermodynam-ic product as the major product are said to be thermodynamically controlled
.For many organic reactions,the most stable product is the one that is formed most
rapidly. In other words,the kinetic product and the thermodynamic product are one

and the same. Electrophilic addition to 1,3-butadiene is an example of a reaction in

which the kinetic product and the thermodynamic product are 
notthe same:The
1,2-addition product is the kinetic product,and the 1,4-addition product is the thermo-

dynamic product.For a reaction in which the kinetic and thermodynamic products are not the same,
the product that predominates depends on the conditions under which the reaction is

carried out. If the reaction is carried out under sufficiently mild (low-temperature)

conditions to cause the reaction to be irreversible
,the major product will be the 
kineticproduct
. For example,when addition of HBr to 1,3-butadiene is carried out at 
the major product is the 1,2-addition product.BrBrCHCHCH2CH2CH3CHCHCH
3CHCH2HBrCHCH21,2-addition product80%1,4-addition product20%80 ¼C80 ¡C,CHCHCH2CH2HBrBrCH3CHCHCH21,3-butadiene1,2-addition product1,4-addition product
kinetic productBrCH3CHCHCH2thermodynamic productBr2CH3CHCH
CCHCH3HBrCH3CH3CHC
CCHCH3HBrCH3CH3CH3CHCH
CHCHCH3Cl2The kinetic product predominates when
the reaction is irreversible.
BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 308
Section 8.7Thermodynamic Versus Kinetic Control of Reactions
309If,on the other hand,the reaction is carried out under sufficiently vigorous (high-tem-
perature) conditions to cause the reaction to be reversible
,the major product will be
the thermodynamic product
. When the same reaction is carried out at 45
¡C,the major
product is the 1,4-addition product. Thus,the 1,2-addition product is the kinetic prod-

uct (it is formed more rapidly),and the 1,4-addition product is the thermodynamic

product (it is the more stable product).A reaction coordinate diagram helps explain why different products predominate
under different reaction conditions (Figure8.2). The first step of the addition reac-

tionÑaddition of a proton to C-1Ñis the same whether the 1,2-addition product or the
1,4-addition product is being formed. It is the second step of the reaction that deter-

mines whether the nucleophile attacks C-2 or C-4. Because the 1,2-addition

product is formed more rapidly,we know that the transition state for its formation is

more stable than the transition state for formation of the 1,4-addition product. This is

the first time we have seen a reaction in which the less stable product has the more sta-

ble transition state!(Br)BrBrCHCHCH2CH2CH3CHCHCH
3CHCH2HBrCHCH21,2-addition product15%1,4-addition product85%45 ¼C1,4-producttransition statefor the 1,2-productcommon
intermediate1,2-productboth products have
the same transition
statetransition state
for the 1,4-productFree energyProgress of the reactionCHCHCH2CH2+ HBrCHCH2BrCH3CHCH2BrCH3CHCHFigure 8.2
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe addition of HBr to
1,3-butadiene.The thermodynamic product predomi-
nates when the reaction is reversible.
At low temperatures there is enough energy for the reactants to overcome
the energy barrier for the first step of the reaction and therefore form the intermediate,

and there is enough energy for the intermediate to form the two addition products.

However,there is not enough energy for the reverse reaction to occur:The products

cannot overcome the large energy barriers separating them from the intermediate.

Consequently,at the relative amounts of the two products obtained reflect the

relative energy barriers to the second step of the reaction. The energy barrier to forma-

tion of the 1,2-addition product is lower than the energy barrier to formation of the

1,4-addition product,so the major product is the 1,2-addition product.
In contrast,at 45
¡C,there is enough energy for one or more of the products to go
back to the intermediate. The intermediate is called a 
common intermediatebecauseit is an intermediate that both products have in common. The ability to return to a

common intermediate allows the products to interconvert. Because the products can
80 ¡C,(80 ¡C),BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 309
310CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
interconvert,the relative amounts of the two products at equilibrium depend on their
relative stabilities. The thermodynamic product reverses less readily because it has a

higher energy barrier to the common intermediate,so it gradually comes to predomi-

nate in the product mixture.Thus,when a reaction is 
irreversible
under the conditions employed in the experi-
ment,it is said to be under 
kinetic control
. When a reaction is under 
kinetic control
,the relative amounts of the products 
depend on the rates
at which they are formed.
A reaction is said to be under thermodynamic control
when there is sufficient energy
to allow it to be 
reversible
. When a reaction is under 
thermodynamic control
,the rel-
ative amounts of the products 
depend on their stabilities.Because a reaction must be
reversible to be under thermodynamic control,thermodynamic control is also called

equilibrium control
.For each reaction that is irreversible under mild conditions and reversible under
more vigorous conditions,there is a temperature at which the changeover happens. The

temperature at which a reaction changes from being kinetically controlled to being

thermodynamically controlled depends on the reactants involved in the reaction. For

example,the reaction of 1,3-butadiene with HCl remains under kinetic control at 45
¡Ceven though addition of HBr to 1,3-butadiene is under thermodynamic control at that

temperature. Because a bond is stronger than a bond (Table3.1),a

higher temperature is required for the products to undergo the reverse reaction. (Re-

member,thermodynamic control is achieved only when there is sufficient energy to

allow one or both of the reactions to be reversible.)
It is easy to understand why the 1,4-addition product is the thermodynamic product.We saw in Section4.11that the relative stability of an alkene is determined by the

number of alkyl groups bonded to its carbons:The greater the number of alkyl

groups,the more stable is the alkene. The two products formed from the reaction of

1,3-butadiene with one equivalent of HBr have different stabilities since the

1,2-addition product has one alkyl group bonded to its carbons,whereas the

1,4-product has two alkyl groups bonded to its carbons. The 1,4-addition product,

therefore,is more stable than the 1,2-addition product. Thus,the 1,4-addition product

is the thermodynamic product.Now we need to see why the 1,2-addition product is formed faster. In other words,
why is the transition state for formation of the 1,2-addition product more stable than

the transition state for formation of the 1,4-addition product? For many years,
BrCH3CHCHCH
21,2-addition productkinetic productBrCH3CHCHCH
21,4-addition productthermodynamic productsp2sp2sp2CBrCClABCthermodynamic control: one or both reactions 
are reversible the major product is the one that is the most stableorABCABCkinetic control: both reactions are 
irreversible the major product is the one formed most rapidlyBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 310
Section 8.7Thermodynamic Versus Kinetic Control of Reactions
311chemists thought it was because the transition state for formation of the 1,2-addition
product resembles the contributing resonance structure in which the positive charge is

on a secondary allylic carbon. In contrast,the transition state for formation of the

1,4-addition product resembles the contributing resonance structure in which the pos-

itive charge is on a less stable primary allylic carbon.
However,when the reaction of is carried out under kinetic con-
trol,essentially the same relative amounts of 1,2-and 1,4-addition products are obtained

as are obtained from the kinetically controlled reaction of The

transition states for formation of the 1,2-and 1,4-addition products from 1,3-pentadiene

should both have the same stability because both resemble a contributing resonance

structure in which the positive charge is on a secondary allylic carbon. Why,then,is the

1,2-addition product still formed faster?
When the electrons of the diene abstract from a molecule of undissociated
DCl,the chloride ion can better stabilize the positive charge at C-2 than at C-4 simply

because when the chloride ion is first produced,it is closer to C-2 than to C-4. So it is

a proximity effect
that causes the 1,2-addition product to be formed faster. A 
proximity
effectis an effect caused by one species being close to another.
PROBLEM 9a.Why does deuterium add to C-1 rather than to C-4 in the preceding reaction?
b.Why was DCl rather than HCl used in the reaction?
CHCH3CHCH
CHCHCH
3CH2DCHClCH2DClsecondary allylic cationClÐ is closer toC-2 than to C-4Dp1,3-butadieneHBr.1,3-pentadieneDClCHCHCH2CH2CH3CHCHCH
3CHCHCH
2CH2HBrCH3CHCHCH2BrÐBrÐBrtransition state forformation of the 1,2-addition productCH3CHCHCH2Brtransition state forformation of the 1,4-addition productààsecondary allylic carbonprimary allylic carbonCH2CHCHCHCH
3DClCHCH
3CH2CHCHCH
2CHCHCHCH3ClDDCl1,2-addition product78%1,3 pentadiene78 C1,4-addition product22%BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 311
PROBLEM 10a.When HBr adds to a conjugated diene,what is the rate-determining step?
b.When HBr adds to a conjugated diene,what is the product-determining step?
Because the greater proximity of the nucleophile to C-2 contributes to the faster
rate of formation of the 1,2-addition product,the 1,2-addition product is the kinetic

product for essentially all conjugated dienes. Do 
notassume,however,that the
1,4-addition product is 
alwaysthe thermodynamic product. The structure of the con-
jugated diene is what ultimately determines the thermodynamic product. For exam-

ple,the 1,2-addition product is both the kinetic product and the thermodynamic

product in the reaction of 4-methyl-1,3-pentadiene with HBr,because not only is the

1,2-product formed faster,it is more stable than the 1,4-product.
The 1,2-and 1,4-addition products obtained from the reaction of 2,4-hexadiene with
HCl have the same stability
Ñboth have the same number of alkyl groups bonded to
their carbons. Thus,neither product is themodynamically controlled.
PROBLEM 11SOLVED
For each of the following reactions,(1)give the major 1,2-and 1,4-addition products and
(2)indicate which is the kinetic product and which is the thermodynamic product:
a.c.
b.d.
SOLUTION TO 11a
First we need to determine which of the terminal carbons of
the conjugated system is going to be the C-1 carbon. The proton will be more apt to add 

to the indicated carbon because the carbocation that is formed shares its positive

charge with a tertiary allylic and a secondary allylic carbon. If the proton were to add to the
carbon at the other end of the conjugated system,the carbocation that would be formed
would be less stable because its positive charge would be shared by a primary allylic and a

secondary allylic carbon. Therefore,3-chloro-3-methylcyclohexene is the 1,2-addition

product and 3-chloro-1-methylcyclohexene is the 1,4-addition product. 3-Chloro-3-

methylcyclohexene is the kinetic product because of the chloride ion
Õs proximity to C-2,
and 3-chloro-1-methylcyclohexene is the thermodynamic product because its more highly

substituted double bond makes it more stable.
sp2sp2sp2HClCHCHCH
3CH3CHCH
2CHCCH3HClHClCH3HClCH2sp2312CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
CHCHCCH3CH24-methyl-1,3-pentadieneCH3CCH3CH3CHCH4-bromo-2-methyl-2-pentene1,2-addition productkinetic product thermodynamic product4-bromo-4-methyl-2-pentene1,4-addition productCH3CH3BrCHCCH3CH3CHBrHBrCHCHCHCH3CH3CHHClCH3CH2CHCHCH
3CH2CHCHCHCH
3CHCH32,4-hexadieneClCl2-chloro-3-hexene1,4-addition product4-chloro-2-hexene1,2-addition productthe products have the same stabilityBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 312
Section 8.8The Diels
ÐAlder Reaction: A 1,4-Addition Reaction3138.8The DielsÐAlder Reaction:A 1,4-Addition ReactionReactions that create new carbon
Ðcarbon bonds are very important to synthetic organ-
ic chemists because it is only through such reactions that small carbon skeletons can

be converted into larger ones (Section6.10). The Diels
ÐAlder reaction is particularlyimportant because it creates twonew carbon
Ðcarbon bonds in a way that forms a
cyclic molecule. In recognition of the importance of this reaction to synthetic organic

chemistry,Otto Diels and Kurt Alder received the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1950.
In a DielsÐAlder reaction
,a conjugated diene reacts with a compound containing a
carbonÐcarbon double bond. The latter compound is called a 
dienophilebecause itÒloves a diene.
Ó(signifies heat.)
This reaction may not look like any reaction that you have seen before,but it is
simply a 1,4-addition of an electrophile and a nucleophile to a conjugated diene. How-

ever,unlike the other 1,4-addition reactions you have seen
Ñwhere the electrophileadds to the diene in the first step and the nucleophile adds to the carbocation in the sec-

ond stepÑthe DielsÐAlder reaction is a concerted reaction
:The addition of the
electrophile and the nucleophile occurs in a single step. The reaction initially looks

odd because the electrophile and the nucleophile that add to the conjugated diene are

the adjacent carbons of a double bond. As with other 1,4-addition reactions,the

double bond in the product is between C-2 and C-3 of what was the conjugated diene.
The DielsÐAlder reaction is another example of a 
pericyclic reaction
Ña reactionthat takes place in one step by a cyclic shift of electrons (Section4.9). It is also a

cycloaddition reaction
Ña reaction in which two reactants form a cyclic product.
More precisely,the Diels
ÐAlder reaction is a cycloaddition reaction
be-cause,of the six electrons involved in the cyclic transition state,
fourcome from the
conjugated diene and twocome from the dienophile. The reaction,in essence,converts
two bonds into two bonds.
spp[42]sp2RRCHCHCHCH
2CH2CH2conjugated dienedienophile
ClCH
3ClCH2CH3CH3HClClCH33-chloro-1-methylcyclohexene3-chloro-3-methylcyclohexenethermodynamicproductkineticproductH+ adds heredienefour    electronsnew  bondnucleophileelectrophilenew  bondnew double bonddienophiletwo    electronstransition statesix    electronsàOtto Paul Hermann Diels
(1876Ð1954)was born in Germany,
the son of a professor of classical

philology at the University of Berlin.

He received a Ph.D. from that univer-

sity,working with Emil Fischer. Diels

was a professor of chemistry at the

University of Berlin and later at the

University of Kiel. Two of his sons

died in World War II. He retired in

1945 after his home and laboratory

were destroyed in bombing raids. He

received the 1950 Nobel Prize in

chemistry,sharing it with his former

student Kurt Alder.
The DielsÐAlder reaction is a
1,4-addition of a dienophile to a
conjugated diene.BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 313
314CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
CCHHHCCHHHHOCCCHHHCHNFigure 8.3
By comparing the electrostaticpotential maps you can see that an
electron-withdrawing substituent
decreases the electron density of
the carbonÐcarbon double bond.The reactivity of the dienophile is increased if one or more electron-withdrawing
groups are attached to its carbons.
An electron-withdrawing group
Ñsuch as a carbonyl group or a cyano
groupÑwithdraws electrons from the double bond. This puts a partial posi-
tive charge on one of its carbons (Figure8.3),making the Diels
ÐAlder reactioneasier to initiate.The partially positively charged carbon of the dienophile can be likened to the
electrophile that is attacked by electrons from C-1 of the conjugated diene. The

other carbon of the dienophile is the nucleophile that adds to C-4 of the diene.
A Molecular Orbital Description of the DielsÐAlder ReactionThe two new bonds that are formed in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction result from a transfer of
electron density between the reactants. Molecular orbtial theory provides an insight into

this process. When electrons are transferred between molecules,we must use the

HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital)of one reactant and the LUMO (lowest
unoccupied molecular orbital)of the other because only an empty orbital can acceptelectrons. It doesn
Õt matter whether we use the HOMO of the dienophile and the
LUMO of the diene or the HOMO of the diene and the LUMO of the dienophile. We

just need to use the HOMO of one and the LUMO of the other.
ssp2psp2CHCH2CCH3CHCH2CCH3OOresonance contributors of the dienophileCHCH2CCH3Oresonance hybridsp2(CN)(CO) a 1,4-addition reaction to 1,3-butadieneCCHHCH2CH2HC30 ¼CCCH3OCHCH2CCH3OCH24321CHCH2HCCH24321electron-withdrawing groupsp2Kurt Alder (1902
Ð1958)was born ina part of Germany that is now
Poland. After World War I,he and

his family moved to Germany. They

were expelled from their home region

when it was ceded to Poland. After

receiving his Ph.D. under Diels in

1926,Alder continued working with

him,and in 1928 they discovered the

DielsÐAlder reaction. Alder was a

professor of chemistry at the Univer-

sity of Kiel and at the University of

Cologne. He received the 1950 Nobel

Prize in chemistry,sharing it with his

mentor,Otto Diels.
BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 314
Section 8.8The Diels
ÐAlder Reaction: A 1,4-Addition Reaction315To construct the HOMO and LUMO needed to illustrate the transfer of electrons
in a DielsÐAlder reaction,we need to look at Figures7.8and 7.9on pages287 and
288. We see that the HOMO of the diene and the LUMO of the dienophile are

asymmetric (Figure8.4a) and that the LUMO of the diene and the HOMO of the

dienophile are symmetric (Figure8.4b).
A pericyclic reaction such as the Diels
ÐAlder reaction can be described by a the-ory called the conservation of orbital symmetry. This simple theory says that peri-
cyclic reactions occur as a result of the overlap of in-phase orbitals. The phase of the

orbitals in Figure8.4is indicated by their color. Thus,each new bond formed in a

DielsÐAlder reaction must be created by the overlap of orbitals of the same color.
Because two new bonds are formed,we need to have four orbitals in the correct

place and with the correct color (symmetry). The figure shows that,regardless of

which pair of HOMO and LUMO we choose,the overlapping orbitals have the same

color. In other words,a Diels
ÐAlder reaction occurs with relative ease. The
DielsÐAlder reaction and other cycloaddition reactions are discussed in greater de-
tail in Section29.4.
PROBLEM 12Explain why a cycloaddition reaction will not occur at room temperature. Recall
that at room temperature all molecules have a ground-state electronic configuration; that

is,the electrons are in the available orbitals with the lowest energy.
Stereochemistry of the Diels
ÐAlder ReactionIf a DielsÐAlder reaction creates an aymmetric carbon in the product,identical
amounts of the Rand Senantiomers will be formed. In other words,the product will be
a racemic mixture (Section5.19).
The DielsÐAlder reaction is a syn addition reaction with respect to both the diene
and the dienophile:One face of the diene adds to one face of the dienophile. Therefore,
[22]ssoverlapping orbitals havethe same color (are in-phase)dienedienophileHOMOdienea.b.
dienophileLUMOLUMOHOMOFigure 8.4
The new bonds formed in a
DielsÐAlder reaction result fromoverlap of in-phase orbitals.
(a)Overlap of the HOMO of the

diene and the LUMO of the
dienophile. (b)Overlap of the

HOMO of the dienophile and the
LUMO of the diene.sNNCNCCHCHCHCH
2CH2CH2HCHasymmetric carbonBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 315
316CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
if the substituents in the dienophileare cis,they will be cis in the product; if the sub-
stituents in the dienophileare trans,they will be trans in the product.
The substituents in the 
dienewill also maintain their relative configurations in the
products. Notice that compounds containing carbon
Ðcarbon triple bonds can also be
used as dienophiles in DielsÐAlder reactions to prepare compounds with two isolated
double bonds.Each of the four previous reactions forms a product with two new asymmetric carbons.
Thus,each product has four stereoisomers. Because only syn addition occurs,each re-

action forms only two of the stereoisomers (Section5.19). The Diels
ÐAlder reaction isstereospecific
Ñthe configuration of the reactants is maintained during the course of
the reactionÑbecause the reaction is concerted. The stereochemistry of the reaction
will be discussed in more detail in Section29.4.
A wide variety of cyclic compounds can be obtained by varying the structures of
the conjugated diene and the dienophile.CO2CH3CO2CH3CCHCH3CH3CH3CH3OOOOOO20 ¼CCH3CH3H3CH3CCOOHCOOHHOOCCCHcis dienophilecis productsHCH3H3CCOOHCOOHHOOCCCHtrans dienophiletrans products
HCH3CHO
OOOOOOOCCCHCHCHCH2CH3HHHCH
3HCH
2CH3HCH3HCH3CH2HCH3HCH
2CH3HCH
3HCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CHCCCHCHCHOOOOCHCHCHCHHHBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 316
Section 8.8The Diels
ÐAlder Reaction: A 1,4-Addition Reaction317If the dienophile has two carbon
Ðcarbon double bonds,two successive Diels
ÐAlder re-actions can occur if excess diene is available.
PROBLEM 13Give the products of each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.d.PROBLEM 14Explain why the following are not optically active:
a.the product obtained from the reaction of 1,3-butadiene with 
cis-1,2-dichloroetheneb.the product obtained from the reaction of 1,3-butadiene with 
trans
-1,2-dichloroethenePredicting the Product when Both Reagents Are Unsymmetrically
SubstitutedIn each of the preceding DielsÐAlder reactions,only one product is formed (ignoring
stereoisomers) because at least one of the reacting molecules is symmetrically substi-
tuted. If both the diene and the dienophile are unsymmetrically substituted,however,

two products are possible:
Two products are possible because the reactants can be aligned in two different ways.
orOCH3CHOCHCH2OCH3CHOCHCH2OOCH3CCH
CHCCH3CH3CH3OOOCH2CCH2CCH3CH3CH2CHCH2HCCNCCHCH2CH2CHCH3CCCCCH3OOCHOOOOOO20 ¼C5-methoxy-3-cyclohexene-carbaldehyde2-methoxy-3-cyclohexene-carbaldehydeOCHCHCHCH2CHOCH3CHCHCH2OCH3OOCHOCH3neither compound is symmetric BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 317
Which of the two products will be formed (or will be formed in greater yield)de-
pends on the charge distribution in each of the reactants. To determine the charge dis-

tribution,we need to draw contributing resonance structures. In the preceding example,

the methoxy group of the diene is capable of donating electrons by resonance. As a

result,the terminal carbon atom bears a partial negative charge. The aldehyde group of

the dienophile,on the other hand,withdraws electrons by resonance,so its terminal

carbon has a partial positive charge.
The partially positively charged carbon atom of the dienophile will bond preferential-
ly to the partially negatively charged carbon of the diene. Therefore,2-methoxy-3-

cyclohexenecarbaldehyde will be the major product.
PROBLEM 15What would be the major product if the methoxy substituent in the preceding reaction were
bonded to C-2 of the diene rather than to C-1?PROBLEM 16Give the products of each of the following reactions (ignore stereoisomers):
a.b.Conformations of the DieneWe saw in Section7.11that a conjugated diene such as 1,3-butadiene is most stable
in a planar confomation. A conjugated diene can exist in two different planar

conformations:an 
s-cis conformation
and an s-trans conformation
. By Òs-cis,Ówe mean that the double bonds are cis about the single bond The

s-trans conformation is little more stable (2.3kcal or 9.6kJ) than the 
s-cis confor-mation because the close proximity of the hydrogens causes some steric strain

(Section2.10). The rotational barrier between the 
s-cis and 
s-trans conformationsor is low enough to allow them to interconvert rapidly
at room temperature.20.5 kJmole)(4.9 kcalmol(single).CH2CHCH2HCCNCCCH3CH2CH3CHCHHCCNCCHCH3OCH2CHCH
OCHOCH3Oresonance contributors of the dieneCHCH
CH2CHCH3OCHCH
CH2CHCH3OOresonance contributors of the dienophileCHCH
CH2CHCH
CH2O318CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Tutorial:
DielsÐAlder reactionBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 318
Section 8.8The Diels
ÐAlder Reaction: A 1,4-Addition Reaction3193-D Molecules:s-trans Conformation ofButadiene; s-cis Conformationof ButadieneIn order to participate in a DielsÐAlder reaction,the conjugated diene must be in an
s-cis conformation because in an 
s-trans conformation,the number 1 and number 4
carbons are too far apart to react with the dienophile. A conjugated diene that is locked

in an s-trans conformation cannot undergo a Diels
ÐAlder reaction.A conjugated diene that is locked in an 
s-cis conformation,such as 1,3-cyclopentadi-
ene,is highly reactive in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction. When the diene is a cyclic compound,
the product of a DielsÐAlder reaction is a bridged bicyclic compoundÑa compoundthat contains two rings that share two nonadjacent carbons.
There are two possible configurations for bridged bicyclic compounds,because the
substituent (R) can point either toward the double bond (the
endo configuration) or
away from the double bond (the 
exoconfiguration).
points toward the double bondpoints away fromthe double bondRRendoexo
CH2CHCO2CH3no reactionlocked in ans-trans conformations-cis conformationHHHmildinterferenceHHHs-trans conformationHHHHHH1414CO2CH31,3-cyclopentadienebridged bicyclic compoundsHCH2CHCO2CH3both rings share these carbonslocked in an s-cis conformation
143215234581%CO2CH3H19%1,3-cyclopentadienebridged bicyclic compoundsHCH2CHCN
NNC60%CH40%Tutorial:
Bicyclic compoundsBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 319
The endo product is formed faster when the dienophile has a substituent with 
electrons. It has been suggested that this is due to stabilization of the transition state by

the interaction of the porbitals of the dienophileÕs substituent with the 
porbitals of thenew double bond
Õs being formed in what was the diene. This interaction,called
secondary orbital overlap
,can occur only if the substituent with the 
porbitals lies un-derneath (endo) rather than away from (exo) the six-membered ring.
PROBLEM 17Which of the following conjugated dienes would not react with a dienophile in a
DielsÐAlder reaction?a.c.e.
b.d.f.
PROBLEM 18SOLVED
List the following dienes in order of decreasing reactivity in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction:SOLUTIONThe most reactive diene has the double bonds locked in an 
s-cis conforma-tion,whereas the least reactive diene cannot achieve the required 
s-cis conformation be-cause it is locked in an 
s-trans conformation.2,3-Dimethyl-1,3-butadiene and 2,4-hexadiene are of intermediate reactivity because they
can exist in both 
s-cis and 
s-trans conformations. 2,4-Hexadiene is less apt to be in the
required s-cis conformation because of steric interference between the terminal methyl
groups. Consequently,2,4-hexadiene is less reactive than 2,3-dimethyl-1,3-butadiene.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
What diene and what dienophile were used to synthesize the following compound?
The diene that was used to form the cyclic product had double bonds on either side of the
double bond in the product,so put in the bonds,then remove the bond between them.
ppOCOCH3CH3s-transs-ciss-transs-cis
CH2OCH2CH2CH2p320CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
When the dienophile has electrons
(other than the electrons of its

carbonÐcarbon double bond), more of
the endo product is formed.
PPBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 320
The new bonds are now on either side of the double bonds.
Erasing these bonds and putting a bond between the two carbons that were attached by
the bonds gives the diene and the dienophile.
Now continue on to Problem 19.
PROBLEM 19What diene and what dienophile should be used to synthesize the following compounds?
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
8.9Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Spectroscopy
is the study of the interaction between matter and 
electromagnetic
radiationÑradiant energy that displays the properties of both particles and waves. Sev-
eral different spectrophotometric techniques are used to identify compounds. Each em-

ploys a different type of electromagnetic radiation. We will start here by looking at

ultraviolet and visible (UV/Vis) spectroscopy. We will look at infrared (IR) spectroscopy

in Chapter13and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy in Chapter14.
COOHCOOHOOOCHCHOCOCH3COCH3OOCNOCOCH3CH3spsOCOCH3CH3new  bondnew  bondsOCOCH3CH3add a bondadd a bondremove a bondSection 8.9Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
321BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 321
322CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
transition*transition*nonbondingantibondingantibondingbondingbondingEEEnergyn**Figure 8.5
Relative energies of the bonding,nonbonding, and antibonding
orbitals.The shorter the wavelength, the greater
is the energy of the radiation.UV/Vis spectroscopy
provides information about compounds with conjugated dou-
ble bonds. Ultraviolet light and visible light have just the right energy to cause an elec-

tronic transitionÑthe promotion of an electron from one orbital to another of higher
energy. Depending on the energy needed for the electronic transition,a molecule will ab-

sorb either ultraviolet or visible light. If it absorbs 
ultraviolet light
,a UV spectrum is
obtained; if it absorbs visible light,a visible spectrum is obtained. Ultraviolet light is
electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths ranging from 180 to 400nm (nanometers);

visible light has wavelengths ranging from 400 to 780nm. (One nanometer is or

10†.) Wavelength
is inversely related to the energy:The shorter the wavelength,
the greater is the energy. Ultraviolet light,therefore,has greater energy than visible light.
The normal electronic configuration of a molecule is known as its 
ground state
Ñallthe electrons are in the lowest-energy molecular orbitals. When a molecule absorbs

light of an appropriate wavelength and an electron is promoted to a higher energy mol-

ecular orbital,the molecule is then in an 
excited state
. Thus,an 
electronic transition
isthe promotion of an electron to a higher energy MO. The relative energies of the bond-

ing,nonbonding,and antibonding molecular orbitals are shown in Figure8.5.
E hchc PlanckÕs constant velocity of light wavelengthl109 m,transitionmax  195*transitionmax  274*290270250230210190Absorbance (nm)COCH3CH3acetonenFigure 8.6
The UV spectrum of acetone.Ultraviolet and visible light have sufficient energy to cause only the two electronic
transitions shown in Figure8.5. The electronic transition with the lowest energy is the

promotion of a nonbonding (lone-pair) electron (n) into a antibonding molecular
orbital. This is called an (stated as 
Ònto star
Ó) transition. The higher energy
electronic transition is the promotion of an electron from a bonding molecular

orbital into a antibonding molecular orbital,known as a (stated as 
Òto starÓ) transition. This means that 
only organic compounds withelectrons can
produce UVVis spectra
.The UV spectrum of acetone is shown in Figure8.6. Acetone has both electrons
and lone-pair electrons. Thus,there are two 
absorption bands
:one for the 
pp*pppppp*p*ppp*p*BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 322
transition and one for the transition. The (stated as 
Òlambda maxÓ) is thewavelength corresponding to the highest point (maximum absorbance) of the absorp-

tion band. For the transition,for the transition,
We know that the transition in Figure8.6corresponds to the
at the shorter wavelength because that transition requires more energy than the
transition.A chromophore
is that part of a molecule that absorbs UV or visible light. The car-
bonyl group is the chromophore of acetone. The following four compounds all have

the same chromophore,so they all have approximately the same 
PROBLEM 20Explain why diethyl ether does not have a UV spectrum,even though it has lone-pair
electrons.OOOO
lmax.p*lmaxpp*lmax274 nm.p*lmax195 nm;pp*lmaxp*Section 8.10The Beer
ÐLambert Law323Applying a sunscreen can protect skin against UV light.Some sunscreens contain an inorganic component,such as

zinc oxide,that reflects the light as it reaches the skin. Others

contain a compound that absorbs UV light. PABA was the

first commercially available UV-absorbing sunscreen. PABA

absorbs UV-B light,but is not very soluble in oily skin

lotions. Less polar compounds,such as Padimate O,are now

commonly used. Recent research has shown that sunscreens

that absorb only UV-B light do not give adequate protection

against skin cancer; both UV-A and UV-B protection are

needed. Giv Tan F absorbs both UV-B and UV-A light,so it

gives better protection.
The amount of protection provided by a particular sun-
screen is indicated by its SPF (sun protection factor). The

higher the SPF,the greater is the protection.
ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT AND
SUNSCREENSExposure to ultraviolet light stimulates special-
ized cells in the skin to produce a black pigment known as

melanin,which causes the skin to look tan. Melanin absorbs

UV light,so it protects our bodies from the harmful effects of

the sun. If more UV light reaches the skin than the melanin can

absorb,the light will burn the skin and can cause photochemi-

cal reactions that can result in skin cancer (Section29.6). UV-

A is the lowest-energy UV light (315 to 400nm) and does the

least biological damage. Fortunately,most of the more danger-

ous,higher-energy UV light,UV-B (290 to 315nm) and UV-C

(180 to 290nm),is filtered out by the ozone layer in the

stratosphere. That is why there is such great concern about the

apparent thinning of the ozone layer (Section9.9).
para-aminobenzoic acidPABACOHH2NO2-ethylhexyl 4-(dimethylamino)benzoatePadimate OCOCH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3(CH3)2NOCH2CH32-ethylhexyl (E)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-propenoateGiv Tan FCH3OOOCH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH38.10The BeerÐLambert LawWilhelm Beer and Johann Lambert independently proposed that at a given wave-
length,the absorbance of a sample depends on the amount of absorbing species that

the light encounters as it passes through a solution of the sample. In other words,ab-

sorbance depends on both the concentration of the sample and the length of the lightBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 323
324CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Wilhelm Beer (1797
Ð1850)wasborn in Germany. He was a banker

whose hobby was astronomy. He was

the first to make a map of the darker

and lighter areas of Mars.
Johann Heinrich Lambert
(1728Ð1777),a German-born mathe-matician,was the first to make accu-

rate measurements of light intensities

and to introduce hyperbolic functions

into trigonometry.
Although the equation that relates
absorbance,concentration,and light

path bears the names of Beer and

Lambert,it is believed that 
Pierre
Bouguer (1698Ð1758),a French
mathematician,first formulated the

relationship in 1729.
3-D Molecule:Methyl vinyl ketonepath through the sample. The relationship among absorbance,concentration,and
length of the light path is known as the 
BeerÐLambert lawand is given by
whereThe molar absorptivity
(formerly called the extinction coefficient) of a compound
is a constant that is characteristic of the compound at a particular wavelength. It is the

absorbance that would be observed for a 1.00M solution in a cell with a 1.00-cm path

length. The molar absorptivity of acetone,for example,is 9000 at 195nm and 13.6 at

274nm. The solvent in which the sample is dissolved when the spectrum is taken is re-

ported because molar absorptivity is not exactly the same in all solvents. So the UV

spectrum of acetone in hexane would be reported as 195nm (hex-

ane); 274nm (hexane). Because absorbance is proportional to con-

centration,the concentration of a solution can be determined if the absorbance and

molar absorptivity at a particular wavelength are known.
The two absorption bands of acetone in Figure8.6are very different in size be-
cause of the difference in molar absorptivity at the two wavelengths. Small molar

absorptivities are characteristic of transitions,so these transitions can be

difficult to detect. Consequently,transitions are usually more useful in

UV/Vis spectroscopy.
In order to obtain a UV or visible spectrum,the solution is placed in a cell. Most
cells have 1-cm path lengths. Either glass or quartz cells can be used for visible spec-

tra,but quartz cells must be used for UV spectra because glass absorbs UV light.
PROBLEM 21A solution of 4-methyl-3-penten-2-one in ethanol shows an absorbance of 0.52 at 236nm
in a cell with a 1-cm light path. Its molar absorptivity in ethanol at that wavelength is

12,600. What is the concentration of the compound?
8.11Effect of Conjugation on 
The transition for methyl vinyl ketoneis at 324nm,and the transi-
tion is at 219nm. Both values are at longer wavelengths than the corresponding
values of acetone because methyl vinyl ketone has two conjugated double bonds.
acetonen   *max274 nm (max = 13.6)max195 nm (max = 9000)H3CCCH3OH3CCCHOmethyl vinyl ketoneCH2   *max331 nm (max = 25)max203 nm (max = 9600)lmaxlmaxpp*p*Lmaxpp*p*emax13.6,lmaxemax9000,lmax 
emolar absorptivity (liter mol1 cm1) 
length of the light path through the sample, in centimeters
 
concentration of the sample, in moles/liter intensity of the radiation emerging from the sample 
0intensity of the radiation entering the sample
 
absorbance of the samplelog 0 cleCells used in UV/Vis spectroscopy.
BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 324
If a compound has enough conjugated double bonds,it will absorb visible light
and the compound will be colored. -Carotene,a precursor of vita-
min A,is an orange substance found in carrots,apricots,and sweet potatoes. Lycopene

is red and is found in tomatoes,watermelon,and pink grapefruit.
An auxochrome
is a substituent that when attached to a chromophore,alters the
and the intensity of the absorption,usually increasing both; OH and groups
are auxochromes. The lone-pair electrons on oxygen and nitrogen are available for

interaction with the electron cloud of the benzene ring,and such an interaction
pNH2lmaxblmax400 nm-carotenemax455 nmlycopenemax474 nmSection 8.11Effect of Conjugation on 
325lmax3-D Molecule:1,3,5,7-OctatetraeneThe increases as the number of
conjugated double bonds increases.
LmaxTable 8.3
Values of    
max and    for Ethylene and Conjugated DienesCompoundmax (nm)(M
1 cm1)CH216515,000
21721,000
H2C25650,000
29085,000
334125,000
364138,000
EnonconjugatedEconjugatednonconjugated    electronsCOHOMOLUMO*conjugated    electronsCCCOHOMOLUMO*Figure 8.7
Conjugation raises the energy ofthe HOMO and lowers the energy
of the LUMO.Conjugation raises the energy of the HOMO and lowers the energy of the LUMO,so
less energy is required for an electronic transition in a conjugated system than in a

nonconjugated system (Figure8.7). The more conjugated double bonds there are in a

compound,the less energy is required for the electronic transition,and therefore the

longer is the wavelength at which the electronic transition occurs.
The values of the transition for several conjugated dienes are shown
in Table8.3. Notice that both the and the molar absorptivity increase as the num-

ber of conjugated double bonds increases. Thus,the of a compound can be used

to predict the number of conjugated double bonds in the compound.lmaxlmaxpp*lmaxBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 325
CCH3CH3CCCCHCCH2CCH
2CH2CH3CHCOCH3NCCCNNOCCCH2COCH3OCOCH2CHCH3CCH2CH2CH2CCCCCCHHCH3CH3CNCH3HCCH2CH2CH2CH3HCCH2CH2CH2CHHMgCHCHRR  CH3 in chlorophyll a R  CH in chlorophyll bOChlorophyll aand bare thepigments that make plants look
green. These highly conjugated
compounds absorb nongreen light.
Therefore, plants reflect green
light.326CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Table 8.4Dependence of the Color Observed on the Wavelength 
of Light AbsorbedWavelengths absorbed (nm)Observed color
380Ð460yellow
380Ð500orange
440Ð560red
480Ð610purple
540Ð650blue
380Ð420 and 610Ð700green
increases Because the anilinium ion does not have an auxochrome,its is
similar to that of benzene.Removing a proton from phenol and thereby forming phenoxide ion (also called
phenolate ion)increases the because the resulting ion has an additional lone pair.

Protonating aniline (and thereby forming the anilinium ion) decreases the 

because the lone pair is no longer available to interact with the cloud of the benzene

ring. Because wavelengths of red light are longer than those of blue light (Figure13.11

on page497),a shift to a longer wavelength is called a 
red shift
,and a shift to a
shorter wavelength is called a 
blue shift
. Deprotonation of phenol results in a red shift,
whereas protonation of aniline produces a blue shift.PROBLEM 22Rank the compounds in order of decreasing 8.12The Visible Spectrum and Color
White light is a mixture of all wavelengths of visible light. If any color is removed
from white light,the remaining light appears colored. So if a compound absorbs visi-

ble light,the compound will appear colored. Its color depends on the color of the light

transmitted to the eye. In other words,it depends on the color produced from the wave-

lengths of light that are notabsorbed.The relationship between the wavelengths of the light absorbed and the color ob-
served is shown in Table8.4. Notice that two absorption bands are necessary to pro-

duce green. Most colored compounds have fairly broad absorption bands; vivid colors

have narrow absorption bands. The human eye is able to distinguish more than a mil-

lion different shades of color!
CHCHCHCH
2lmax  :red shiftblue shift200 nm400 nmplmax,lmaxbenzene255 nmmax =phenol270 nmOHphenoxide ion287 nmOaniline280 nmNH2anilinium ion254 nmNH3lmaxlmax.3-D Molecules:para-Aminobenzoic acid;Phenol; Phenoxide ionBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 326
Azobenzenes (benzene rings connected by an bond) have an extended con-
jugated system that causes them to absorb light from the visible region of the spec-

trum. Some substituted azobenzenes are used commercially as dyes. Varying the

extent of conjugation and the substituents attached to the conjugated system provides

a large number of different colors. Notice that the only difference between butter yel-

low and methyl orange is an group. Methyl orange is a commonly used

acidÐbase indicator. When margarine was first produced,it was colored with butter
yellow to make it look more like butter. (White margarine would not have been very

appetizing.) This dye was abandoned after it was found to be carcinogenic.
is currently used to color margarine (page 325).
PROBLEM 23a.At one of the following ions is purple and the other is blue. Which is which?
b.What would be the difference in the colors of the compounds at 
C(CH3)2N(CH3)2NN(CH3)2N(CH3)2CN(CH3)2pH3?pH7,methyl orangean azobenzeneCH3NNNH3CSO3Nabutter yellowan azobenzeneCH3NNNH3Cb-CaroteneSO3  NaNNSection 8.12The Visible Spectrum and Color
327ANTHOCYANINS: A COLORFUL
CLASS OF COMPOUNDSA class of highly conjugated compounds called
anthocyanins is responsible for the red,purple,and blue colors

of many flowers (poppies,peonies,cornflowers),fruits (cran-

berries,rhubarb,strawberries,blueberries),and vegetables

(beets,radishes,red cabbage).
In a neutral or basic solution,the monocyclic fragment of
the anthocyanin is not conjugated with the rest of the molecule.

The anthocyanin is a colorless compound because it does not
HOOHOHOHR'ROanthocyanin(three rings are conjugated)red, blue, or purpleH2OH2OH3OHOOHR  H, OH, or OCH3R'  H, OH, or OCH3OHOHR'ROOHHHOOHOHOHR'ROOH(conjugation is disrupted)colorless(conjugation is disrupted)colorlessabsorb visible light. In an acidic environment,the OH group be-
comes protonated and water is eliminated. (Recall that water,

being a weak base,is a good leaving group.) Loss of water re-

sults in the third ringÕs becoming conjugated with the rest of themolecule. As a result of the extended conjugation,the antho-

cyanin absorbs visible light with wavelengths between 480 and

550nm. The exact wavelength of light absorbed depends on the

substituents (R) on the anthocyanin. Thus,the flower,fruit,or

vegetable appears red,purple,or blue,depending on what the R

groups are. You can see this if you change the pH of cranberry

juice so that it is no longer acidic.Lycopene, -carotene, and
anthocyanins are found in the
leaves of trees, but their
characteristic colors are usually
obscured by the green color of
chlorophyll. In the fall when
chlorophyll degrades, the colors
become apparent.bBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 327
The enzyme lactate dehydrogenase catalyzes the reduction of pyruvate by NADH
to form lactate. NADH is the only species in the reaction mixture that absorbs light at

340nm,so the rate of the reaction can be determined by monitoring the decrease in

absorbance at 340nm (Figure8.9).
328CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Absorbance at 240 nmTimeCH3CH2NO2nitroethaneHOCH3CHnitroethane anionNO2H2O   max  240 nmFigure 8.8
The rate at which a protonis removed from nitroethane is
determined by monitoring
the increase in absorbance at
240nm.
Absorbance at 340 nmTime
pyruvate   max  340 nmlactatedehydrogenaseCH3CCOOONADHH
lactateCH3CHCOOOHNADFigure 8.9
The rate of reduction of pyruvateby NADH is measured by
monitoring the decrease in
absorbance at 340nm.
8.13Uses of UV/VIS Spectroscopy
Reaction rates are commonly measured using UV/Vis spectroscopy. The rate of
any reaction can be measured,as long as one of the reactants or one of the prod-

ucts absorbs UV or visible light at a wavelength at which the other reactants and

products have little or no absorbance. For example,the anion of nitroethane has a
at 240nm,but neither (the other product) nor the reactants show any
significant absorbance at that wavelength. In order to measure the rate at which

hydroxide ion removes a proton from nitroethane (i.e.,the rate at which the ni-

troethane anion is formed),the UV spectrophotometer is adjusted to measure

absorbance at 240nm as a function of time instead of absorbance as a function of

wavelength. Nitroethane is added to a quartz cell containing a basic solution,and

the rate of the reaction is determined by monitoring the increase in absorbance at
240nm (Figure8.8).
H2OlmaxBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 328
Summary329Absorbance at 287 nmpHpH  pKaFigure 8.10
The absorbance of an aqueous solution ofphenol as a function of pH.The of a compound can be determined by UV/Vis spectroscopy if either the
acidic form or the basic form of the compound absorbs UV or visible light. For exam-

ple,the phenoxide ion has a at 287nm. If the absorbance at 287nm is determined

as a function of pH,the of phenol can be ascertained by determining the pH at

which exactly one-half the increase in absorbance has occurred (Figure8.10). At this

pH,half of the phenol has been converted into phenoxide. Recall from Section1.20

that the HendersonÐHasselbalch equation states that the of the compound is the
pH at which half the compound exists in its acidic form and half exists in its basic

form UV spectroscopy can also be used to estimate the nucleotide composition of DNA.
The two strands of DNA are held together by both A
ÐT base pairs and GÐC base pairs(Section27.4). When DNA is heated,the strands break apart. Single-stranded DNA

has a greater molar absorptivity at 260nm than does double-stranded DNA. The melt-

ing temperature of DNA is the midpoint of an absorbance-versus-temperature

curve (Figure8.11). For double-stranded DNA,increases with increasing numbers

of GÐC base pairs because they are held together by three hydrogen bonds,whereas
AÐT base pairs are held together by only two hydrogen bonds. Therefore,can be
used to estimate the number of GÐC base pairs. These are just a few examples of the
many uses of UV/Vis spectroscopy.
mmm([HA][A]).papalmaxpaAbsorbance at 260 nmTemperature (C)T  TmFigure 8.11
The absorbance of a solution of DNA as afunction of temperature.SummaryDienesare hydrocarbons with two double bonds.
Conjugated double bondsare separated by one singlebond. Isolated double bondsare separated by more thanone single bond. Cumulated double bondsare adjacent toeach other. A conjugated diene is more stable than an

isolated diene,which is more stable than a cumulated
diene. The least stable alkene has the greatest value.
H¡A diene can have as many as four configurational isomers:
E-E,Z-Z,E-Z,and 
Z-E.An isolated diene,like an alkene,undergoes only 1,2-
addition. If there is only enough electrophilic reagent to add

to one of the double bonds,it will add preferentially to the

more reactive bond. A conjugated diene reacts with a limit-

ed amount of electrophilic reagent to form a 
1,2-additionPROBLEM 24Describe how one could determine the rate of the alcohol dehydrogenase catalyzed oxida-
tion of ethanol by (Section20.11).
NADBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 329
330CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
Summary of Reactions1.If there is excess electrophilic reagent,both double bonds of an 
isolated dienewill undergo electrophilic addition.
If there is only one equivalent of electrophilic reagent,only the most reactive of the double bonds of an 
isolated dienewill undergo
electrophilic addition (Section8.5).
2.Conjugated dienesundergo 1,2-and 1,4-addition with one equivalent of an electrophilic reagent (Section8.6).
3.Conjugated dienesundergo 1,4-cycloaddition with a dienophile (a Diels
ÐAlder reaction) (Section8.8).
OCCHCH2CH2CHCHCH2CRROCHBrBrRCH2CHCHRCHCHCHRCHCHRRCHHBrRCH2CH1,2-addition product1,4-addition product
CH2CHCH2CH2CCH2CH3CHCH2CH2CCH3CH2HBrCH3BrCH2CHCH2CH2CCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CCH3HBrCH3BrBrexcessproduct
and a 1,4-addition product
. The first step is
addition of the electrophile to one of the carbons at the

end of the conjugated system.When a reaction produces more than one product,the
product formed most rapidly is the 
kinetic product
; themost stable product is the 
thermodynamic product
. Ifthereaction is carried out under mild conditions so that it is

irreversible,the major product will be the kinetic product; if

the reaction is carried out under vigorous conditions so that

it is reversible,the major product will be the thermodynamic

product. When a reaction is under 
kinetic control
,the rela-
tive amounts of the products depend on the rates at which

they are formed; when a reaction is under 
thermodynamiccontrol
,the relative amounts of the products depend on their
stabilities. A common intermediateis an intermediate thatboth products have in common.
In a DielsÐAlder reaction,a conjugated diene reacts with
a dienophile to form a cyclic compound; in this concerted
cycloaddition reaction,two new bonds are formed
at the expense of two bonds. The conjugated diene must

be in an 
s-cisconformation
. The reactivity of the dienophile
is increased by electron-withdrawing groups attached to the
carbons. The 
HOMOof one reactant and the LUMOofthe other are used to show the transfer of electrons between
sp2ps[4  2]sp2the molecules. According to the conservation of orbital sym-
metry,
pericyclic reactions
occur as a result of the overlap
of in-phase orbitals. The Diels
ÐAlder reaction is stereospe-cific; it is a syn addition reaction with respect to both the

diene and the dienophile. If both the diene and the
dienophile are unsymmetrically substituted,two products

are possible because the reactants can be aligned in two dif-

ferent ways. In 
bridged bicyclic compounds,a substituent
can be endoor exo; endo is favored if the dienophile
Õs sub-stituent has electrons.
Ultraviolet
and visible(UV/Vis
) spectroscopy
provide
information about compounds with conjugated double

bonds. UV light is higher in energy than visible light; the

shorter the wavelength,the greater is the energy. UV and

visible light cause and 
electronic transi-
tions; transistions have larger molar absorptivities.
A chromophore
is that part of a molecule that absorbs UV
or visible light. The 
BeerÐLambert lawis the relationshipamong absorbance,concentration,and length of the light

path:The more conjugated double bonds there are

in a compound,the less energy is required for the electronic

transition and the longer is the at which it occurs.

Reaction rates and values are commonly measured

using UV/Vis spectroscopy.
palmaxAcle.pp*pp*p*pBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 330
Problems331Key Terms
absorption band (p.322)
1,2-addition (p.306)

1,4-addition (p.306)

allene (p.298)

auxochrome (p.325)

BeerÐLambert law (p.324)
blue shift (p.326)

bridged bicyclic compound (p.319)

chromophore (p.322)

concerted reaction (p.313)

common intermediate (p.309)

conjugate addition (p.306)

conjugated double bonds (p.298)

cumulated double bonds (p.298)

cycloaddition reaction (p.313)
cycloaddition reaction (p.313)
DielsÐAlder reaction (p.313)
[42]diene (p.298)
dienophile (p.313)

direct addition (p.306)

electromagnetic radiation (p.321)

electronic transition (p.322)

endo (p.319)

equilibrium control (p.310)

excited state (p.322)

exo (p.319)

ground state (p.322)

highest occupied molecular orbital(HOMO) (p.314)
isolated double bonds (p.298)

kinetic control (p.310)

kinetic product (p.308)

lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
(LUMO) (p.314)
molar absorptivity (p.324)
pericyclic reaction (p.313)

polyene (p.298)

proximity effect (p.311)

red shift (p.326)

s-cis conformation (p.318)
s-trans conformation (p.318)
spectroscopy (p.321)

tetraene (p.298)

thermodynamic control (p.310)

thermodynamic product (p.308)

triene (p.298)

ultraviolet light (p.322)

UV/Vis spectroscopy (p.322)

visible light (p.322)

wavelength (p.322)
Problems
25.Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.d.b.e.
c.26.Draw structures for the following compounds:
a.(2
E,4E)-1-chloro-3-methyl-2,4-hexadienec.(3
Z,5Z)-4,5-dimethyl-3,5-nonadieneb.(3
Z,5E)-4-methyl-3,5-nonadiened.(3
E,5E)-2,5-dibromo-3,5-octadiene27.a.How many linear dienes are there with molecular formula (Ignore cis
Ðtrans isomers.)b.How many of the linear dienes that you found in part a are conjugated dienes?

c.How many are isolated dienes?
28.Which compound would you expect to have the greater value,1,2-pentadiene or 1,4-pentadiene?
29.In Chapter3,you learned that is found in the waxy coating of apple skins. What is its systematic name?
30.Diane O
ÕFile treated 1,3-cyclohexadiene with and obtained two products (ignoring stereoisomers). Her lab partner treated
1,3-cyclohexadiene with HBr and was surprised to find that he obtained only one product (ignoring stereoisomers). Account for

these results.31.Give the major product of each of the following reactions. One equivalent of each reagent is used:
a.b.
CH3HBrperoxide
HBrCH3Br2  -farnesenea-farneseneH¡C6H10  ?CH3CH2CCCH
2CH2CCH
CH3HOCH2CH2CH2CH3HHCCClCCH2CH2CH2CHCH3CCH
2BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 331
332CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
c.d.
32.a.Give the products obtained from the reaction of 1mole HBr with 1mole 1,3,5-hexatriene.
b.Which product(s) will predominate if the reaction is under kinetic control?

c.Which product(s) will predominate if the reaction is under thermodynamic control?
33.4-Methyl-3-penten-2-one has two absorption bands in its UV spectrum,one at 236nm and one at 314nm.
a.Why are there two absorption bands?

b.Which band shows the greater absorbance?
34.How could the following compounds be synthesized using a Diels
ÐAlder reaction?a.c.
b.d.
35.a.How could each of the following compounds be prepared from a hydrocarbon in a single step?
1.2.3.
b.What other organic compound would be obtained from each synthesis?
36.How would the following substituents affect the rate of a Diels
ÐAlder reaction?a.an electron-donating substituent in the diene

b.an electron-donating substituent in the dienophile

c.an electron-withdrawing substituent in the diene
37.Give the major products obtained from the reaction of one equivalent of HCl with the following:
a.2,3-dimethyl-1,3-pentadiene

b.2,4-dimethyl-1,3-pentadiene

For each reaction,indicate the kinetic and thermodynamic products.
38.Give the product or products that would be obtained from each of the following reactions:
a.b.
CHCH
CCH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH
CHCH2CH2CH2HOCH3CH3BrCH3OHBrOOCO2CH3OOCCH34-methyl-3-penten-2-oneCH3CCHCCH
3CH3OCHCH
2HBrCH3peroxide
CHCH
2HBrCH3BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 332
Problems333c.d.
39.How could one use UV spectroscopy to distinguish between the compounds in each of the following pairs?
a.
b.c.d.40.What two sets of a conjugated diene and a dienophile could be used to prepare the following compound?
41.a.Which dienophile is more reactive in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction?b.Which diene is more reactive in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction?42.Cyclopentadiene can react with itself in a Diels
ÐAlder reaction. Draw the endo and exo products.
43.Which diene and which dienophile could be used to prepare each of the following compounds?
a.c.
b.d.
OOOClClCNCNCCH3OCH2CHCHor
CHOCH3CH2CHCHCHCH
2OCH3OCH21.2.CHCHor
OCH2CHCH2CHOCH2CHCHor
CH2CHCH3OCCH3andOHOCH
3OandOCHCHCHCHCH
2CH2CHCHCHCCH
3CH2andOandCHC
CH2CH2CHCH2ClCH2CHC
CH2CH2CHCCH3CH2OBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 333
334CHAPTER 8R
eactions of Dienes ¥ Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy
44.a.Give the products of the following reaction:
b.How many stereoisomers of each product could be obtained?
45.As many as 18 different Diels
ÐAlder products could be obtained by heating a mixture of 1,3-butadiene and 2-methyl-
1,3-butadiene. Identify the products.
46.Many credit-card slips do not have carbon paper. Nevertheless,when you sign the slip,an imprint of your signature is made on
 thebottom copy. The carbonless paper contains tiny capsules that are filled with the colorless compound whose structure is shown h
ere:When you press on the paper,the capsules burst and the colorless compound comes into contact with the acid-treated paper,form-
ing a highly colored compound. What is the structure of the colored compound?
47.On the same graph,draw the reaction coordinate for the addition of one equivalent of HBr to 2-methyl-1,3-pentadiene and one
equivalent of HBr to 2-methyl-1,4-pentadiene. Which reaction is faster?
48.While attempting to recrystallize maleic anhydride,Professor Nots O. Kareful dissolved it in freshly distilled cyclopentadie
nerather than in freshly distilled cyclopentane. Was his recrystallization successful?
49.A solution of ethanol has been contaminated with benzene
Ña technique employed to make ethanol unfit to drink. Benzene has a
molar absorptivity of 230 at 260nm in ethanol,and ethanol shows no absorbance at 260nm. How could the concentration of

benzene in the solution be determined?50.Reverse Diels
ÐAlder reactions can occur at high temperatures. Why are high temperatures required?
51.The following equilibrium is driven to the right if the reaction is carried out in the presence of maleic anhydride:
What is the function of maleic anhydride?52.In 1935,J. Bredt,a German chemist,proposed that a bicycloalkene cannot have a double bond at a bridgehead carbon unless one
of the rings contains at least eight carbon atoms. This is known as Bredt
Õs rule. Explain why there cannot be a double bond at thisposition.bridgeheadcarbonOCH3CH3H3CCH3OOOOmaleic anhydride(CH3)2NN(CH3)2N(CH3)2OOBr2BRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 334
Problems33553.The experiment shown below and discussed in Section8.8,showed that the proximity of the chloride ion to C-2 in the transitio
nstate caused the 1,2-addition product to be formed faster than the 1,4-addition product:
a.Why was it important for the investigators to know that the reaction was being carried out under kinetic control?
b.How could the investigators determine that the reaction was being carried out under kinetic control?
54.A student wanted to know whether the greater proximity of the nucleophile to the C-2 carbon in the transition state was what
caused the 1,2-addition product to be formed faster when 1,3-butadiene reacts with HCl. Therefore,he decided to investigate the

reaction of 2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexadiene with HCl. His friend,Noel Noall,told him that he should use 1-methyl-1,3-cyclohexa-

diene instead. Should he follow his friend
Õs advice?55.a.Methyl orange (whose structure is given in Section8.12) is an acid
Ðbase indicator. In solutions of it is red,and in
solutions of it is yellow. Account for the change in color.
b.Phenolphthaleinis alsoan indicator,but it exhibits a much more dramatic color change. In solutions of it is
colorless,and in solutions of it is deep red-purple. Account for the change in color.
phenolphthaleinOHOOOHpH8.5,pH8.5,pH4,pH4,CH2CHCHCHCH
3DClCHCH
3CH2CHCHCH
2CHCHCHCH3ClDDCl78 C3-D Molecule:PhenolphthaleinBRUI08-298_335r4  21-03-2003  12:07 PM  Page 335
336Reactions of Alkanes¥
Radicalsvitamin Evitamin CWe haveseen that there are three classes of hydrocarbons:
alkanes,which
contain only single bonds; alkenes
,which contain double bonds; and
alkynes
,which contain triple bonds. We examined the chemistry of alkenes
in Chapter4and the chemistry of alkynes in Chapter6. Now we will take a look at the

chemistry of alkanes.Alkanesare called saturated hydrocarbons
because they are saturated with hy-
drogen. In other words,they do not contain any double or triple bonds. A few exam-

ples of alkanes are shown here. Their nomenclature is discussed in Section2.2.
Alkanes are widespread both on Earth and on other planets. The atmospheres of
Jupiter,Saturn,Uranus,and Neptune contain large quantities of methane the

smallest alkane,which is an odorless and flammable gas. In fact,the blue colors of

Uranus and Neptune are due to methane in their atmospheres. Alkanes on Earth are

found in natural gas and petroleum,which are formed by the decomposition of plant

and animal material that has been buried for long periods in the EarthÕs crust,an en-

vironment with little oxygen. Natural gas and petroleum,therefore,are known as

fossil fuels.Natural gas consists of about 75% methane. The remaining 25% is composed of
small alkanes such as ethane,propane,and butane. In the 1950s,natural gas replaced

coal as the main energy source for domestic and industrial heating in many parts of the

United States.Petroleum is a complex mixture of alkanes and cycloalkanes that can be separated
into fractions by distillation. The fraction that boils at the lowest temperature (hydro-
(CH4),CH3CH2CH2CH3butaneCH2CH3CH3CH3ethylcyclopentane4-ethyl-3,3-dimethyldecane
trans-1,3-dimethyl-cyclohexane9BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 336
Introduction337carbons containing three and four carbons) is a gas that can be liquefied under pres-
sure. This gas is used as a fuel for cigarette lighters,camp stoves,and barbecues. The

fraction that boils at somewhat higher temperatures (hydrocarbons containing 5 to 11

carbons) is gasoline; the next fraction (9 to 16 carbons) includes kerosene and jet fuel.

The fraction with 15 to 25 carbons is used for heating oil and diesel oil,and the

highest-boiling fraction is used for lubricants and greases. The nonpolar nature of

these compounds is what gives them their oily feel. After distillation,a nonvolatile

residue called asphalt or tar is left behind.The 5-to 11-carbon fraction that is used for gasoline is,in fact,a poor fuel for
internal combustion engines and requires a process known as catalytic cracking to be-

come a high-performance gasoline. Catalytic cracking converts straight-chain hydro-

carbons that are poor fuels into branched-chain compounds that are high-performance
fuels. Originally,cracking (also called 
pyrolysis
) involved heating gasoline to very
high temperatures in order to obtain hydrocarbons with three to five carbons. Modern

cracking methods use catalysts to accomplish the same thing at much lower tem-

peratures. The small hydrocarbons are then catalytically recombined to form highly

branched hydrocarbons.gasolinekerosene, jet fuelheating oil, diesel oillubricants, greasesheatingelementnatural gasasphalt, tarOCTANE NUMBER
When poor fuels are used in an engine,combus-
tion can be initiated before the spark plug fires.
A pinging or knocking may then be heard in the running

engine. As the quality of the fuel improves,the engine is less

likely to knock. The quality of a fuel is indicated by its octane

number. Straight-chain hydrocarbons have low octane num-

bers and make poor fuels. Heptane,for example,with an arbi-

trarily assigned octane number of 0,causes engines to knock

badly. Branched-chain fuels burn more slowly
Ñtherebyreducing knockingÑbecause they have more primary hydro-
gens. Consequently,branched-chain alkanes have high octane

numbers. 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane,for example,does not

cause knocking and has arbitrarily been assigned an octane
number of 100.The octane rating of a gasoline is determined by comparingits knocking with the knocking of mixtures of heptane and

2,2,4-trimethylpentane. The octane number given to the

gasoline corresponds to the percent of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane

in the matching mixture. The term 
Òoctane numberÓoriginat-ed from the fact that 2,2,4-trimethylpentane contains eight

carbons.CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CCH2CHCH3heptaneoctane number  02,2,4-trimethylpentaneoctane number  100CH3CH3CH3FOSSIL FUELS: A PROBLEMATIC
ENERGY SOURCEWe face three major problems as a consequence
of our dependence on fossil fuels for energy. First,fossil fuels

are a nonrenewable resource and the world
Õs supply is contin-
ually decreasing. Second,a group of Middle Eastern and

South American countries controls a large portion of the

world
Õs supply of petroleum. These countries have formed a
cartel known as the 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries(OPEC),which controls both the supply and the
price of crude oil. Political instability in any OPEC country

can seriously affect the world oil supply. Third,burning fossil

fuels increases the concentrations of and in the

atmosphere. Scientists have established experimentally that
SO2CO2atmospheric causes 
Òacid rain,
Óa threat to the EarthÕsplants and,therefore,to our food and oxygen supplies. The at-

mospheric concentration has increased 20% in the last 10

years,causing scientists to predict an increase in the Earth
Õstemperature as a result of the absorption of infrared radiation
by (the so-called 
greenhouse effect
). A steady increase in
the temperature of the Earth would have devastating conse-

quences,including the formation of new deserts,massive crop

failure,and the melting of polar ice caps with a concomitant

rise in sea level. Clearly,what we need is a renewable,non-

political,nonpolluting,and economically affordable source 

of energy.
CO2CO2SO2BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 337
338CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ Radicals9.1The Low Reactivity of AlkanesThe double and triple bonds of alkenes and alkynes are composed of strong bonds
and relatively weak bonds. We have seen that the reactivity of 
alkenes
and alkynes
is the result of an electrophile being attracted to the cloud of electrons that constitutes

the bond.Alkaneshave only strong bonds. Because the carbon and hydrogen atoms of an
alkane have approximately the same electronegativity,the electrons in the and
bonds are shared equally by the bonding atoms. Consequently,none of the
atoms in an alkane have any significant charge. This means that neither nucleophiles

nor electrophiles are attracted to them. Because they have only strong bonds and

atoms with no partial charges,alkanes are very unreactive compounds. Their failure to

undergo reactions prompted early organic chemists to call them 
paraffins
,from the
Latin parum affinis,
which means Òlittle affinity
Ó(for other compounds).9.2Chlorination and Bromination of Alkanes
Alkanes do react with chlorine or bromine to form alkyl chlorides or alkyl
bromides. These 
halogenation reactions
take place only at high temperatures or in
the presence of light (symbolized by hv). They are the only reactions that alkanes
undergo
Ñwith the exception of 
combustion
,a reaction with oxygen that takes place
at high temperatures and converts alkanes to carbon dioxide and water.
The mechanism for the halogenation of an alkane is well understood. The high
temperature (or light) supplies the energy required to break the or 

bond homolytically. Homolytic bond cleavage
is the initiation stepof the reactionbecause it creates the radical that is used in the first propagation step (Section4.10).

Recall that an arrowhead with one barb signifies the movement of one electron

(Section3.6).
A radical(often called a free radical
) is a species containing an atom with an
unpaired electron. A radical is highly reactive because it wants to acquire an electron to

complete its octet. In the mechanism for the monochlorination of methane,the chlorine

radical formed in the initiation step abstracts a hydrogen atom from methane,forming

HCl and a methyl radical. The methyl radical abstracts a chlorine atom from 

forming methyl chloride and another chlorine radical,which can abstract a hydrogen

atom from another molecule of methane. These two steps are called 
propagation steps
because the radical created in the first propagation step reacts in the second propaga-

tion step to produce a radical that can repeat the first propagation step. Thus,the two

propagation steps are repeated over and over. The first propagation step is the rate-

determining step of the overall reaction. Because the reaction has radical intermediates

and repeating propagation steps,it is called a 
radical chain reaction
.Cl2,ClCl2Cl
orhBrBr2Br
orhhomolyticcleavageBrBrClClmethyl chlorideCH4CH3ClHCl
Cl2orhethyl bromideCH3CH3CH3CH2BrHBr
Br2orh(Br2)(Cl2)ssCCCHsppsBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 338
Section 9.2Chlorination and Bromination of Alkanes
3393-D Molecule:Methyl radicalAny two radicals in the reaction mixture can combine to form a molecule in which all
the electrons are paired. The combination of two radicals is called a 
termination step
because it helps bring the reaction to an end by decreasing the number of radicals

available to propagate the reaction. The radical chlorination of alkanes other than

methane follows the same mechanism. A radical chain reaction,with its characteris-

tic initiation,propagation,and termination steps,was first described in Section4.10.
The reaction of an alkane with chlorine or bromine to form an alkyl halide is
called a radical substitution reaction
because radicals are involved as intermedi-
ates and the end result is the substitution of a halogen atom for one of the hydrogen

atoms of the alkane.In order to maximize the amount of monohalogenated product obtained,a radical
substitution reaction should be carried out in the presence of excess alkane. Excess

alkane in the reaction mixture increases the probability that the halogen radical will
collide with a molecule of alkane rather than with a molecule of alkyl halide
Ñeven
toward the end of the reaction,by which time a considerable amount of alkyl halide

will have been formed. If the halogen radical abstracts a hydrogen from a molecule of

alkyl halide rather than from a molecule of alkane,a dihalogenated product will be

obtained.Bromination of alkanes follows the same mechanism as chlorination.
2 Brpropagation stepsinitiation stepBrmechanism for the monobromination of ethaneHBrCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2BrBrBrCH3CH2BrBr
Br2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2Brtermination stepsHBrBrBrBrorhClHCl
Cl2CH2ClCH3ClCH2ClClCH2Cl2a dihalogenated compoundClCl2initiation stepClClorhHClHClCH3a methyl radicalpropagation stepsCH3CH3mechanism for the monochlorination of methaneClCH3ClClClClCl2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3Cltermination stepsClTutorial:
Radical chain reaction3-D Molecule:Ethyl radicalBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 339
340CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsPROBLEM 1Show the initiation,propagation,and termination steps for the monochlorination of
cyclohexane.
PROBLEM 2Write the mechanism for the formation of carbon tetrachloride,from the reaction of

methane with PROBLEM 3SOLVED
If cyclopentane reacts with more than one equivalent of at a high temperature,how
many dichlorocyclopentanes would you expect to obtain as products?
SOLUTIONSeven dichlorocyclopentanes would be obtained as products. Only one iso-
mer is possible for the 1,1-dichloro compound. The 1,2-and 1,3-dichloro compounds have

two asymmetric carbons. Each has three stereoisomers because the cis isomer is a meso

compound and the trans isomer is a pair of enantiomers.9.3Factors that Determine Product Distribution
Two different alkyl halides are obtained from the monochlorination of butane. Substi-
tution of a hydrogen bonded to one of the terminal carbons produces 1-chlorobutane,

whereas substitution of a hydrogen bonded to one of the internal carbons forms

2-chlorobutane.
The expected (statistical) distribution of products is 60% 1-chlorobutane and 40%
2-chlorobutane because six of butane
Õs 10 hydrogens can be substituted to form
1-chlorobutane,whereas only four can be substituted to form 2-chlorobutane. This as-

sumes,however,that all of the bonds in butane are equally easy to break. Then,

the relative amounts of the two products would depend only on the probability of a

chlorine radical colliding with a primary hydrogen,compared with its colliding with a

secondary hydrogen. When we carry out the reaction in the laboratory and analyze the

product,however,we find that it is 29% 1-chlorobutane and 71% 2-chlorobutane.

Therefore,probability alone does not explain the regioselectivity of the reaction. Be-

cause more 2-chlorobutane is obtained than expected and 
the rate-determining step of
CHClCl2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH
3CH2CHCH32-chlorobutaneexpected  40%experimental  71%1-chlorobutaneexpected  60%experimental  29%butaneHClhClClClHClHClHHClClHHClClHClHClHHClClHHClenantiomersmeso compoundenantiomersmeso compoundCl2Cl2hv.CCl4,BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 340
Section 9.3Factors that Determine Product Distribution
341the overall reaction is hydrogen atom abstraction
,we conclude that it must be easier
to abstract a hydrogen atom from a secondary carbon than from a primary carbon.Alkyl radicals have different stabilities (Section4.10),and the more stable the
radical,the more easily it is formed because the stability of the radical is reflected in

the stability of the transition state leading to its formation. Consequently,it is easier

to remove a hydrogen atom from a secondary carbon to form a secondary radical than

it is to remove a hydrogen atom from a primary carbon to form a primary radical.
When a chlorine radical reacts with butane,it can abstract a hydrogen atom from an
internal carbon,thereby forming a secondary alkyl radical,or it can abstract a hydro-

gen atom from a terminal carbon,thereby forming a primary alkyl radical. Because it

is easier to form the more stable secondary alkyl radical,2-chlorobutane is formed

faster than 1-chlorobutane.
After experimentally determining the amount of each chlorination product obtained
from various hydrocarbons,chemists were able to conclude that 
at room temperature
it is 5.0 times easier for a chlorine radical to abstract a hydrogen atom from a tertiary

carbon than from a primary carbon,and it is 3.8 times easier to abstract a hydrogen

atom from a secondary carbon than from a primary carbon. (See Problem 17.) The pre-

cise ratios differ at different temperatures.
To determine the relative amounts of products obtained from radical chlorination of
an alkane,both 
probability
(the number of hydrogens that can be abstracted that will
lead to the formation of the particular product) and 
reactivity
(the relative rate at which
a particular hydrogen is abstracted) must be taken into account. When both factors are

considered,the calculated amounts of 1-chlorobutane and 2-chlorobutane agree with

the amounts obtained experimentally.
number of hydrogens  reactivity6  1.0  6.0percent yield   21   29%relative amount of 1-chlorobutanerelative amount of 2-chlorobutane
6.0number of hydrogens  reactivity4  3.8  15percent yield   21   71%15tertiary5.0secondary3.8primary1.0relative rates of alkyl radical formation by a chlorine radical at room temperatureincreasing rate of formation2-chlorobutanea secondaryalkyl radicala primaryalkyl radical1-chlorobutaneClCl
2ClCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3ClHClHClCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2ClCl2ClClRRCRtertiary radicalRRCHsecondary radicalHRCHprimary radicalHHCHmethyl radicalrelative stabilities of alkyl radicalsmoststableleast
stableBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 341
342CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsThe percent yield of each alkyl halide is calculated by dividing the relative amount
of the particular product by the sum of the relative amounts of all the alkyl halide

products Radical monochlorination of 2,2,5-trimethylhexane results in the formation of five
monochlorination products. Because the relative amounts of the five alkyl halides total
the percent yield of each product can be
calculated as follows:
Because radical chlorination of an alkane can yield several different monosubstitu-
tion products as well as products that contain more than one chlorine atom,it is not the

best method for synthesizing an alkyl halide. Addition of a hydrogen halide to an alkene

(Section4.1) or conversion of an alcohol to an alkyl halide (a reaction we will study in

Chapter12) is a much better way to make an alkyl halide. Radical halogenation of an

alkane is nevertheless still a useful reaction because it is the only way to convert an inert

alkane into a reactive compound. In Chapter10,we will see that once the halogen is in-

troduced into the alkane,it can be replaced by a variety of other substituents.
PROBLEM 4When 2-methylpropane is monochlorinated in the presence of light at room temperature,
36% of the product is 2-chloro-2-methylpropane and 64% is 1-chloro-2-methylpropane.

From these data,calculate how much easier it is to abstract a hydrogen atom from a tertiary

carbon than from a primary carbon under these conditions.PROBLEM 5How many alkyl halides can be obtained from monochlorination of the following alkanes?

Neglect stereoisomers.
a.d.g.
b.e.h.

c.f.i.
CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCCH
3CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2CCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH335 9.07.67.65.06.035,61521.9  1.0  9.0     9.0
35   26%2  3.8  7.6     7.6
35   22%CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2ClCH3ClCH3CH3CH3Cl2CH3CCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CCHCH
2CHCH32  3.8  7.6     7.6
35   22%CH3ClCH3CH31  5.0  5.0      5.0
35   14%6  1.0  6.0      6.0
35   17%CH3ClCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2CHCHCH3CH3CCH2CH2CCH3CH3CCH2CH2CHCH2Cl2,2,5-trimethylhexaneHClBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 342
PROBLEM 6Calculate the percent yield of each product obtained in Problems 5a,b,and c if chlorina-
tion is carried out in the presence of light at room temperature.9.4The ReactivityÐSelectivity PrincipleThe relative rates of radical formation when a bromine radical abstracts a hydrogen
atom are different from the relative rates of radical formation when a chlorine radi-

cal abstracts a hydrogen atom. At 125
¡C,a bromine radical abstracts a hydrogen
atom from a tertiary carbon 1600 times faster than from a primary carbon and ab-

stracts a hydrogen atom from a secondary carbon 82 times faster than from a prima-

ry carbon.When a bromine radical is the hydrogen-abstracting agent,the differences in reac-
tivity are so great that the reactivity factor is vastly more important than the probabili-

ty factor. For example,radical bromination of butane gives a 98% yield of

2-bromobutane,compared with the 71% yield of 2-chlorobutane obtained when bu-

tane is chlorinated (Section9.3). In other words,bromination is more highly regiose-

lective than chlorination.
Similarly,bromination of 2,2,5-trimethylhexane gives an 82% yield of the product in
which bromine replaces the tertiary hydrogen. Chlorination of the same alkane results
in a 14% yield of the tertiary alkyl chloride (Section9.3).
PROBLEM 7Carry out the calculations that predict thata.2-bromobutane will be obtained in 98% yield.
b.2-bromo-2,5,5,-trimethylhexane will be obtained in 82% yield.
BrBr2CH3CCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CCH2CH2CCH3HBr2-bromo-2,5,5-trimethylhexane82%2,2,5-trimethylhexaneCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3hCH3BrBr2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CHCH32-bromobutane98%1-bromobutane2%HBrhtertiary1600secondary82primary1relative rates of radical formation by a bromine radical at 125  
Cincreasing rate of formationSection 9.4The Reactivity
ÐSelectivity Principle343A bromine radical is less reactive and
more selective than a chlorine radical.
Tutorial:
Radical brominationBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 343
344CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ Radicals2 kcal2 kcal2 kcal2 kcalalkane123123ClalkaneBrProgress of the reactionPotential energya.Progress of the reactionPotential energyb.less than 1-kcaldifference
in Eachlorination isexothermic;
transition states
resemble reactantsabout 1.5-kcal
difference
in Eabromination is endothermic;transition states resemble productsWhy are the relative rates of radical formation so different when a bromine radical
rather than a chlorine radical is used as the hydrogen-abstracting reagent? To answer

this question,we must compare the values for the formation of primary,sec-

ondary,and tertiary radicals when a chlorine radical is used,as opposed to when a

bromine radical is used. These values can be calculated using the bond dissocia-

tion energies in Table3.1on p.129. (Remember that is equal to the energy of the

bond being broken minus the energy of the bond being formed.)
We must also be aware that bromination is a much slower reaction than chlorina-
tion. The activation energy for abstraction of a hydrogen atom by a bromine radical

has been found experimentally to be about 4.5 times greater than that for abstraction of

a hydrogen atom by a chlorine radical. Using the calculated values and the ex-

perimental activation energies,we can draw reaction coordinate diagrams for the for-

mation of primary,secondary,and tertiary radicals by chlorine radical abstraction

(Figure9.1a) and by bromine radical abstraction (Figure9.1b).
Because the reaction of a chlorine radical with an alkane to form a primary,sec-
ondary,or tertiary radical is exothermic,the transition states resemble the reactants

more than they resemble the products (see the Hammond postulate,Section4.3). The
H¡H¡H¡H¡ClCH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH3ClCH3HClHClHCl10199
97
 103  103  103 ClCH3CCH3CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CH2H (kcal/mol)CH3BrCH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CHCH3BrCH3HBrHBrHBr10199
97
 87  87  87 BrCH3CCH3CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CH2H (kcal/mol)
H (kJ/mol)5950
42H (kJ/mol)CH3Figure 9.1
(a)Reaction coordinate diagrams for the formation of primary, secondary, and tertiary alkyl radicals as a result of
abstraction of a hydrogen atom by a chlorine radical. The transition states have relatively little radical character because
they resemble the reactants.
(b)Reaction coordinate diagrams for the formation of primary, secondary, and tertiary alkyl radicals as a result of

abstraction of a hydrogen atom by a bromine radical. The transition states have a relatively high degree of radical
character because they resemble the products.BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 344
Cl2F2Br2I2HalogensSection 9.4The Reactivity
ÐSelectivity Principle345The more reactive a species is, the less
selective it will be.reactants all have approximately the same energy,so there will be only a small differ-
ence in the activation energies for removal of a hydrogen atom from a primary,sec-

ondary,or tertiary carbon. In contrast,the reaction of a bromine radical with an alkane

is endothermic,so the transition states resemble the products more than they resemble

the reactants. Because there is a significant difference in the energies of the product

radicalsÑdepending on whether they are primary,secondary,or tertiary
Ñthere is asignificant difference in the activation energies. Therefore,a chlorine radical makes

primary,secondary,and tertiary radicals with almost equal ease,whereas a bromine

radical has a clear preference for formation of the easiest-to-form tertiary radical

(Figure9.1). In other words,because a bromine radical is relatively unreactive,it is

highly selective about which hydrogen atom it abstracts. In contrast,the much more

reactive chlorine radical is considerably less selective. These observations illustrate

the reactivityÐselectivity principle
,which states that 
the greater the reactivity of a
species,the less selective it will be
.Because chlorination is relatively nonselective,it is a useful reaction only when
there is just one kind of hydrogen in the molecule.PROBLEM 8If 2-methylpropane is brominated at 125
¡C in the presence of light,what percent of the
product will be 2-bromo-2-methylpropane? Compare your answer with the percent given

in Problem 4 for chlorination.PROBLEM 9Take the same alkanes whose percentages of monochlorination products you calculated in

Problem 6,and calculate what the percentages of monobromination products would be if

bromination were carried out at 125¡C.By comparing the values for the sum of the two propagating steps for the
monohalogenation of methane,we can understand why alkanes undergo chlorination

and bromination but not iodination and why fluorination is tooviolent a reaction to

be useful.BrICH4CH3BrBr2HBrBr10546   87    70 CH3CH3H 6 kcal/molCH4CH3II2HII10536   71    57 CH3CH3H 13 kcal/molFCH4CH3FF2HFF10538(or 423 kJ/mol)(or 100 kJ/mol)(or 25 kJ/mol)(or 54 kJ/mol) 136  108 CH3CH3H 101 kcal/molClCH4CH3ClCl2HClCl10558 103    84 CH3CH3H 24 kcal/molH¡Cl2HClhClTutorial:
ReactivityÐselectivityBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 345
The fluorine radical is the most reactive of the halogen radicals,and it reacts violently
with alkanes In contrast,the iodine radical is the least reac-

tive of the halogen radicals. In fact,it is so unreactive that it is

unable to abstract a hydrogen atom from an alkane. Consequently,it reacts with an-

other iodine radical and reforms PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Would chlorination or bromination of methylcyclohexane produce a greater yield of 1-halo-
1-methylcyclohexane?

To solve this kind of problem,first draw the structures of the compounds being discussed.
1-Halo-1-methylcyclohexane is a tertiary alkyl halide,so the question becomes,
ÒWill
bromination or chlorination produce a greater yield of a tertiary alkyl halide?
ÓBecausebromination is more selective,it will produce a greater yield of the desired compound.

Chlorination will form some of the tertiary alkyl halide,but it will also form significant

amounts of primary and secondary alkyl halides.
Now continue on to Problem 10.
PROBLEM 10a.Would chlorination or bromination produce a greater yield of 1-halo-2,3-dimethylbutane?
b.Would chlorination or bromination produce a greater yield of 2-halo-2,3-dimethylbutane?

c.Would chlorination or bromination be a better way to make 1-halo-2,2-dimethylpropane?
9.5Radical Substitution of Benzylicand Allylic Hydrogens
Benzyl and allyl radicals are more stable than alkyl radicals because their unpaired
electrons are delocalized. We have seen that electron delocalization increases the sta-

bility of a molecule (Sections7.6and 7.8).
We know that the more stable the radical,the faster it can be formed. This means that
a hydrogen bonded to either a benzylic carbon or an allylic carbon will be preferential-
ly substituted in a halogenation reaction. As we saw in Section9.4,bromination is more

highly regioselective than chlorination,so the percent of substitution at the benzylic or

allylic carbon is greater for bromination.X2HX(X = Cl or Br)
CH2CH3CHCH3benzylic substitutedproductXXCH3CH3X2hI2.(H¡34 kcalmol)(H¡31 kcalmol).346CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsElectron delocaliztion increases 
the stability of a molecule.3-D Molecule:Benzyl radical
tertiaryradicalallylradicalbenzylradicalsecondaryradicalprimaryradicalmethylradicalvinylradicalRRCRCH2CHCH2CH2CHCH2RRCHHRCHHHCHrelative stabilities of radicalsmoststableleast
stableBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 346
Section 9.5Radical Substitution of Benzylic and Allylic Hydrogens
347N-Bromosuccinimide (NBS) is frequently used to brominate allylic positions be-
cause it allows a radical substitution reaction to be carried out without subjecting the

reactant to a relatively high concentration of that could add to its double bond.
The reaction involves initial homolytic cleavage of the bond in NBS. This
generates the bromine radical needed to initiate the radical reaction. Light or heat

and a radical initiator such as a peroxide are used to promote the reaction. The bro-

mine radical abstracts an allylic hydrogen to form HBr and an allylic radical.The

allylic radical reacts with forming the allyl bromide and a chain-propagating

bromine radical.The used in the second step of the preceding reaction sequence is produced in low
concentration from the reaction of NBS with HBr.
The advantage to using NBS to brominate allylic positions is that neither or HBr is
formed at a high enough concentration to add to the double bond.When a radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from an allylic carbon,the unpaired elec-
tron of the allylic radical is shared by two carbons. In other words,the allylic radical

has two resonance contributors. In the following reaction,only one substitution prod-

uct is formed,because the groups attached to the carbonsare the same in both res-

onance contributors:
If,however,the groups attached to the two carbons of the allylic radical are 
notthesame in both resonance contributors,two substitution products are formed:
HBrCH3CHCHCH
2CH3CHBr2CHCH2BrCH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CHCHCH
2Br1-bromo-2-buteneBrCH3CHCHCH
23-bromo-1-buteneBrsp2HBrCH2CHCH
2CH2Br2CHCH2BrBrCH2CHCH
23-bromopropeneBrCH3CHCH
2sp2Br2NOOHNOOBrHBrBr2Br2HBrBrBr2BrBrBr2,NBrBrNOOsuccinimideHhperoxideNOON-bromosuccinimideNBSBr or Br2HXCH2CHCH
2X2CH2allylic substitutedproductXCH3CHTutorial:
Radicals: common terms3-D Molecule:Allyl radicalBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 347
348CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsPROBLEM 11Two products are formed when methylenecyclohexane reacts with NBS. Explain how each
is formed.PROBLEM 12SOLVED
How many allylic substituted bromoalkenes are formed from the reaction of 2-pentene
with NBS? Ignore stereoisomers.SOLUTIONThe bromine radical will abstract a secondary allylic hydrogen from C-4 of
2-pentene in preference to a primary allylic hydrogen from C-1. The resonance contribu-

tors of the resulting radical intermediate have the same groups attached to the carbons,

so only one bromoalkene is formed. Because of the high selectivity of the bromine radical,

an insignificant amount of radical will be formed by abstraction of a hydrogen from the

less reactive primary allylic position.
9.6Stereochemistry of Radical
Substitution ReactionsIf a reactant does not have an asymmetric carbon and a radical substitution reaction
forms a product with an asymmetric carbon,a racemic mixture will be obtained.
To understand why both enantiomers are formed,we must look at the propagation
steps of the radical substitution reaction. In the first propagation step,the bromine rad-

ical removes a hydrogen atom from the alkane,creating a radical intermediate. The
sp2NBS, peroxideBrCH2CH2BrCH2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH3Br2HBrBrhan asymmetric carbonCBrHCH2CH3CH3CBrHCH3CH2CH3HBrCH3CH3CH2BrHa pair of enantiomersFischer projectionsa pair of enantiomersperspective formulasCH3CH3CH2configuration of the productsCH3CHCHCHCH
3CH3CHCHCHCH
3HBrCH3CHCHCHCH
3CH3CHCHCH
2CH3BrNBS, peroxideBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 348
Section 9.6Stereochemistry of Radical Substitution Reactions
349carbon bearing the unpaired electron is hybridized; therefore,the three atoms to
which it is bonded lie in a plane. In the second propagation step,the incoming halogen

has equal access to both sides of the plane. As a result,both the 
Rand Senantiomersare formed. Identical amounts of the Renantiomer and the Senantiomer are obtained,so the reaction is not stereoselective.
Notice that the stereochemical outcome of a radical substitution reaction
is identi-cal to the stereochemical outcome of a radical addition reaction
(Section5.19). This is
because both reactions form a radical intermediate,and it is the reaction of the inter-

mediate that determines the configuration of the products.
Identical amounts of the Rand Senantiomers are also obtained if a hydrogen bond-ed to an asymmetric carbon is substituted by a halogen. Breaking the bond to the

asymmetric carbon destroys the configuration at the asymmetric carbon and forms a

planar radical intermediate. The incoming halogen has equal access to both sides of

the plane,so identical amounts of the two enantiomers are obtained.
What happens if the reactant already has an asymmetric carbon and the radical sub-
stitution reaction creates a second asymmetric carbon? In this case,a pair of diastere-

omers will be formed in unequal amounts.Diastereomers are formed because the new asymmetric carbon created in the product
can have either the 
Ror the Sconfiguration,but the configuration of the asymmetric
carbon in the reactant will be unchanged in the product because none of the bonds to

that carbon are broken during the course of the reaction.
More of one diastereomer will be formed than the other because the transition statesleading to their formation are diastereomeric and,therefore,do not have the same

energy.
PROBLEM 13a.What hydrocarbon with molecular formula forms only two monochlorinated
products? Both products are achiral.b.What hydrocarbon with the same molecular formula as in part a forms only three mono-
chlorinated products? One is achiral and two are chiral.
C4H10CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2ClHCH3CHBr
newasymmetric
carbonoriginalasymmetric
carbonClBr2HBrHhsp2HCH3BrCH2CH3CCH3CH2CH3CBr2BrCH3CH2CH3CBrH3CCH2CH3CBrHBrC BrBr
CH3Ha radical intermediateCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3ClHBrHCH3CH2CH3a pair of diastereomersFischer projectionsa pair of diastereomersperspective formulasClHHBrconfiguration of the productsBrHCCCH2CH3H3CClHconfiguration doesnot changeconfiguration does
not changeBrHCCCH2CH3H3CClH3-D Molecule:sec-Butyl radicalBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 349
9.7Reactions of Cyclic CompoundsCyclic compounds undergo the same reactions as acyclic compounds. For example,
cyclic alkanes,like acyclic alkanes,undergo radical substitution reactions with chlo-

rine or bromine.Cyclic alkenes undergo the same reactions as acyclic alkenes.

In other words,
the reactivity of a compound usually depends solely on its functional
group,not on whether it is cyclic or acyclic
.PROBLEM 14a.Give the major product(s) of the reaction of 1-methylcyclohexene with the following
reagents,ignoring stereoisomers:
1.2.3.HBr4.
b.Give the configuration of the products.
HBrperoxideBr2CH2Cl2NBSperoxideHBrNBSperoxideBrBrbromocyclohexane3-bromocyclopenteneCl2HClhClBr2BrchlorocyclopentanebromocyclohexanehHBr350CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsCYCLOPROPANE
Cyclopropane is one notable exception to the gen-
eralization that cyclic and acyclic compounds un-
dergo the same reactions. Although it is an alkane,cyclopropane

undergoes electrophilic addition reactions as if it were an alkene.
Cyclopropane is more reactive than propene toward addition of
acids such as HBr and HCl,but is less reactive toward addition
HBrCH
3CH2CH2BrFeCl3Cl2ClCH2CH2CH2ClNi80 CH2CH3CH2CH3of and so a Lewis acid (or ) is needed to
catalyze halogen addition (Section1.21).
It is the strain in the small ring that makes it possible for
cyclopropane to undergo electrophilic addition reactions

(Section2.11). Because of the 60
¡bond angles in the three-
membered ring,the orbitals cannot overlap head-on; this

decreases the effectiveness of the orbital overlap. Thus,the
Òbanana bondsÓin cyclopropane are considerably weak-
er than normal bonds (Figure2.6on p.92). Conse-

quently,three-membered rings undergo ring-opening reactions

with electrophilic reagents.XYH
2CCH
2XYCH2sCCCCsp3FeBr3FeCl3Br2,Cl2BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 350
9.8Radical Reactions in Biological SystemsFor a long time,scientists assumed that radical reactions were not important in biolog-
ical systems because a large amount of energy
Ñheat or lightÑis required to initiate aradical reaction and it is difficult to control the propagation steps of the chain reaction

once initiation occurs. However,it is now widely recognized that there are biological

reactions that involve radicals. Instead of being generated by heat or light,the radicals

are formed by the interaction of organic molecules with metal ions. These radical re-

actions take place in the active site of an enzyme. Containing the reaction in a specific

site allows the reaction to be controlled.
One biological reaction that involves radicals is the one responsible for the conversion
of toxic hydrocarbons to less toxic alcohols. Carried out in the liver,the hydroxyl-

ation of the hydrocarbon is catalyzed by an iron-porphyrin-containing enzyme called

cytochrome (Section12.8). An alkyl radical intermediate is created when 

abstracts a hydrogen atom from an alkane. In the next step,dissociates

homolytically into and and the immediately combines with the radical

intermediate to form the alcohol.This reaction can also have the opposite toxicological effect. That is,instead of con-
verting a toxic hydrocarbon into a less toxic alcohol,substituting an OH for an H in

some compounds causes a nontoxic compound to become toxic. Therefore,com-

pounds that are nontoxic in vitro
are not necessarily nontoxic 
in vivo.For example,
studies done on animals showed that substituting an OH for an H caused methylene

chloride to become a carcinogen when it is inhaled.
Another important biological reaction shown to involve a radical intermediate is
the conversion of a ribonucleotide into a deoxyribonucleotide. The biosynthesis of

ribonucleic acid (RNA) requires ribonucleotides,whereas the biosynthesis of de-

oxyribonucleic acid (DNA) requires deoxyribonucleotides (Section27.1). The first

step in the conversion of a ribonucleotide to the deoxyribonucleotide needed for DNA

biosynthesis involves abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the ribonucleotide to form
(CH2Cl2)FeVan alkaneHCFeIIIan alcoholHOC
FeIVa radicalintermediateCOOH
HOHO,FeIIIFeIV OHFeV OP450Section 9.8Radical Reactions in Biological Systems
351DECAFFEINATED COFFEE
AND THE CANCER SCAREAnimal studies showing that methylene chloride
becomes a carcinogen when inhaled caused some concern be-

cause methylene chloride was the solvent used to extract caf-

feine from coffee beans in the manufacture of decaffeinated

coffee. However,when methylene chloride was added to

drinking water fed to laboratory rats and mice,researchers

found no toxic effects. They observed no toxicological re-

sponses of any kind either in rats that had consumed an

amount of methylene chloride equivalent to the amount that

would be ingested by drinking 120,000 cups of decaffeinated

coffee per day or in mice that had consumed an amount

equivalent to drinking 4.4 million cups of decaffeinated cof-
fee per day. In addition,no increased risk of cancer was
found in a study of thousands of workers exposed daily to in-

haled methylene chloride. (Studies done on humans do not

always agree with those done on animals.) Because of the ini-

tial concern,however,researchers sought alternative methods

for extracting caffeine from coffee beans. Extraction by liq-

uid at supercritical temperatures and pressures was

found to be a better method since it extracts caffeine without

simultaneously extracting some of the flavor compounds that

are removed when methylene chloride is used. There is

essentially no difference in flavor between regular coffee and

coffee decaffeinated with 
CO2.CO2BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 351
352CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ Radicalsa radical intermediate. The radical that abstracts the hydrogen is formed as a result of
the interaction between Fe(III) and an amino acid at the active site of the enzyme.
Unwanted radicals in biological systems must be destroyed before they have an op-
portunity to cause damage to cells. Cell membranes,for example,are susceptible to

the same kind of radical reactions that cause butter to become rancid (Section26.3).

Imagine the state of your cell membranes if radical reactions could occur readily. Rad-

ical reactions in biological systems also have been implicated in the aging process.

Unwanted radical reactions are prevented by 
radical inhibitorsÑcompounds that de-stroy reactive radicals by creating unreactive radicals or compounds with only paired

electrons. Hydroquinone is an example of a radical inhibitor. When hydroquinone

traps a radical,it forms semiquinone,which is stabilized by electron delocalization

and is,therefore,less reactive than other radicals. Furthermore,semiquinone can trap

another radical and form quinone,a compound whose electrons are all paired.
Two examples of radical inhibitors that are present in biological systems are vita-
min C and vitamin E. Like hydroquinone,they form relatively stable radicals. Vitamin

C (also called ascorbic acid) is a water-soluble compound that traps radicals formed in

the aqueous environment of the cell and in blood plasma. Vitamin E (also called
) is a water-insoluble (hence fat-soluble) compound that traps radicals
formed in nonpolar membranes. Why one vitamin functions in aqueous environments

and the other in nonaqueous environments should be apparent from their struc-

tures and electrostatic potential maps,which show that vitamin C is a relatively polar

compound,whereas vitamin E is nonpolar.
a-tocopherolhydroquinoneOHOHRRsemiquinonequinone
reactiveradicalOHORHOORHa ribonucleotideHOROROROOHNOa deoxyribonucleotidea radical intermediateHOH
NOHOOH
NOseveral steps3-D Molecules:Vitamin C; Vitamin E
CH3OCH3HOH3CCH2OHOHOOHHHOOH
vitamin E-tocopherolvitamin Cascorbic acidBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 352
Section 9.9Radicals and Stratospheric Ozone
353FOOD PRESERVATIVES
Radical inhibitors that are present in food areknown as 
preservatives
or antioxidants. They pre-
serve food by preventing unwanted radical reactions. Vitamin E
9.9Radicals and Stratospheric OzoneOzone a major constituent of smog,is a health hazard at ground level. In the
stratosphere,however,a layer of ozone shields the Earth from harmful solar radiation.

The greatest concentration of ozone occurs between 12 and 15 miles above the Earth
Õssurface. The ozone layer is thinnest at the equator and densest towards the poles.

Ozone is formed in the atmosphere from the interaction of molecular oxygen with

very short wavelength ultraviolet light.
The stratospheric ozone layer acts as a filter for biologically harmful ultraviolet radia-
tion that otherwise would reach the surface of the Earth. Among other effects,high-

energy short-wavelength ultraviolet light can damage DNA in skin cells,causing

mutations that trigger skin cancer (Section29.6). We owe our very existence to this

protective ozone layer. According to current theories of evolution,life could not have

developed on land in the absence of this ozone layer. Instead,life would have had to

remain in the ocean,where water screens out the harmful ultraviolet radiation.
Since about 1985,scientists have noted a precipitous drop in stratospheric ozone
over Antarctica. This area of ozone depletion,known as the 
Òozone hole,Óis unprece-
dented in the history of ozone observations. Scientists subsequently noted a similar

decrease in ozone over Arctic regions,and in 1988 they detected a depletion of ozone

over the United States for the first time. Three years later,scientists determined that

the rate of ozone depletion was two to three times faster than originally anticipated.

Many in the scientific community blame recently observed increases in cataracts and

skin cancer as well as diminished plant growth on the ultraviolet radiation that has

penetrated the reduced ozone layer. It has been predicted that erosion of the protec-

tive ozone layer will cause an additional 200,000 deaths from skin cancer over the

next 50 years.
Strong circumstantial evidence implicates synthetic chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
Ñalkanes in which all the hydrogens have been replaced by fluorine and chlorine,such

as and Ñas a major cause of ozone depletion. These gases,known
commercially as have been used extensively as cooling fluids in refrigera-

tors and air conditioners. They were also once widely used as propellants in aerosol
Freons¨,CF2Cl2CFCl3ozoneO2OOO3OO2h(O3),In 1995,the Nobel Prize in chemistry
was awarded to 
Sherwood Rowland
,Mario Molina,and 
Paul Crutzen
for their pioneering work in
explaining the chemical processes

responsible for the depletion of the

ozone layer in the stratosphere. Their

work demonstrated that human

activities could interfere with global

processes that support life. This was

the first time that a Nobel Prize 

was presented for work in the

environmental sciences.
is a naturally occurring preservative found in vegetable oil.

BHA and BHT are synthetic preservatives that are added to

many packaged foods.
food preservativesOCH3OHC(CH3)3C(CH3)3OCH3C(CH3)3OHCH3OH(CH3)3Cbutylated hydroxyanisoleBHAbutylated hydroxytolueneBHTF. Sherwood Rowland
was born inOhio in 1927. He received a Ph.D.

from the University of Chicago and is

a professor of chemistry at the

University of California,Irvine.
Mario Molinawas born in Mexico
in 1943 and subsequently became a
U.S. citizen. He received a Ph.D.

from the University of California,

Berkeley,and then became a

postdoctoral fellow in RowlandÕs

laboratory. He is currently a

professor of earth,atmospheric,and

planetary sciences at the
Massachusetts Institute of

Technology.
Paul Crutzen
was born inAmsterdam in 1933. He was trained

as a meteorologist and became

interested in stratospheric chemistry

and statospheric ozone in particular.

He is a professor at the Max Planck

Institute for Chemistry in Mainz,
Germany.
BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 353
Polar stratospheric clouds increasethe rate of ozone destruction.
These clouds form over Antarctica
during the cold winter months.
Ozone depletion in the Arctic is less
severe because it generally does not
get cold enough for the polar
stratospheric clouds to form.Growth of the Antarctic ozonehole, located mostly over the
continent of Antarctica, since 1979.
The images were made from data
supplied by total ozone-mapping
spectrometers (TOMS). The color
scale depicts the total ozone values
in Dobson units. The lowest 
ozone densities are represented 
by dark blue.missing 9PYBAA354CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsTHE CONCORDE AND OZONEDEPLETIONSupersonic aircraft cruise in the lower strato-
sphere,and their jet engines convert molecular oxygen and ni-
trogen into nitrogen oxides such as NO and Like CFCs,
nitrogen oxides react with stratospheric ozone. Fortunately,the

supersonic Concorde,built jointly by England and France,

makes only a limited number of flights each week.
NO2.spray cans (deodorant,hair spray,etc.) because of their odorless,nontoxic,and non-
flammable properties and because they are chemically inert and thus do not react with

the contents of the can. Such use now,however,has been banned.
Chlorofluorocarbons remain very stable in the atmosphere until they reach the
stratosphere. There they encounter wavelengths of ultraviolet light that cause the ho-

molytic cleavage that generates chlorine radicals.
The chlorine radicals are the ozone-removing agents. They react with ozone to form
chlorine monoxide radicals and molecular oxygen. The chlorine monoxide radicals

then react with ozone to regenerate chlorine radicals. These two propagating steps are

repeated over and over,destroying a molecule of ozone in each step. It has been calcu-

lated that each chlorine atom destroys 100,000 ozone molecules!
ClO
3ClOO
2ClO3ClO2 O
2hCClFClFCCl
ClFFMovie:Chlorofluorocarbons 
and ozoneBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 354
Summary of Reactions355SummaryAlkanesare called saturated hydrocarbons
because they
do not contain any double or triple bonds. Since they also

have only strong bonds and atoms with no partial

charges,alkanes are very unreactive. Alkanes do undergo

radical substitution reactions
with chlorine or
bromine at high temperatures or in the presence of

light,to form alkyl chlorides or alkyl bromides. The substi-

tution reaction is a radical chain reaction
with initiation,propagation
,and 
termination steps. Unwanted radical re-
actions are prevented by 
radical inhibitorsÑcompoundsthat destroy reactive radicals by creating unreactive radicals

or compounds with only paired electrons.The rate-determining step of the radical substitutionreaction is hydrogen atom abstraction to form a 
radical.The relative rates of radical formation are benzylic 

allylvinyl methyl. To determine the

relative amounts of products obtained from the radical halo-

genation of an alkane,both probability and the relative rate

at which a particular hydrogen is abstracted must be taken

into account. The 
reactivityÐselectivity principle
states thatthe more reactive a species is,the less selective it will be. A
3¡2¡1¡(Br2)(Cl2)sbromine radical is less reactive
than a chlorine radical,so a
bromine radical is more selective
about which hydrogen
atom it abstracts. 
N-Bromosuccinimide (NBS) is used to
brominate allylic positions. Cyclic compounds undergo the

same reactions as acyclic compounds.
If a reactant does not have an asymmetric carbon,and a
radical substitution reaction forms a product with an asym-

metric carbon,a racemic mixture will be obtained. A

racemic mixture is also obtained if a hydrogen bonded to an

asymmetric carbon is substituted by a halogen. If a radical
substitution reaction creates an asymmetric carbon in a
reactant that already has an asymmetric carbon,a pair of

diastereomers will be obtained in unequal amounts.Some biological reactions involve radicals formed by 
the interaction of organic molecules with metal ions. The

reactions take place in the active site of an enzyme.
Strong circumstantial evidence implicates synthetic
chlorofluorocarbons as being responsible for the diminish-
ing ozone layer. The interaction of these compounds with

UV light generates chlorine radicals,which are the ozone-

removing agents.
Summary of Reactions1.Alkanesundergo radical substitution reactions with or in the presence of heat or light (Sections9.2,9.3,and 9.4).
2.Alkyl-substituted benzenes
undergo radical halogenation at the benzylic position (Section9.5).
3.Alkenes
undergo radical halogenation at the allylic positions. NBS is used for radical bromination at the allylic position
(Section9.5).
or hperoxideNBSBrCH2RBr
2CHRHBr
hBrCH3CH3Cl2CH3CH2ClHCl
or hor hexcessCH3CH3Br2CH3CH2BrHBr
excessbromination is more selective than chlorinationBr2Cl2or hperoxideRCH2CHNBS
RCHHBrRCHCHCH
2CHCH2CH2BrBrBRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 355
356CHAPTER 9R
eactions of Alkanes ¥ RadicalsProblems
15.Give the product(s) of each of the following reactions,ignoring stereoisomers:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
16.a.An alkane with molecular formula forms only one monochlorinated product when heated with Give the systematic
name of this alkane.b.An alkane with molecular formula forms seven monochlorinated products (ignore stereoisomers) when heated with 
Give the systematic name of this alkane.
17.Dr. Al Cahall wanted to determine experimentally the relative ease of removal of a hydrogen atom from a tertiary,a secondary
,and
a primary carbon by a chlorine radical. He allowed 2-methylbutane to undergo chlorination at 300
¡C and obtained as products36% 1-chloro-2-methylbutane,18% 2-chloro-2-methylbutane,28% 2-chloro-3-methylbutane,and 18% 1-chloro-3-methylbutane.

What values did he obtain for the relative ease of removal of tertiary,secondary,and primary hydrogen atoms by a chlorine radic
alunder the conditions of his experiment?
18.At 600
¡C,the ratio of the relative rates of formation of a tertiary,a secondary,and a primary radical by a chlorine radical is
2.6:2.1:1. Explain the change in the degree of regioselectivity compared with what Dr. Al Cahall found in Problem 17.
19.Iodine does not react with ethane even though is more easily cleaved homolytically than the other halogens. Explain.

20.Give the major product of each of the following reactions,ignoring stereoisomers:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
peroxideNBSCH3CH3Cl2hCH3CHCH3CH3peroxideNBSperoxideNBSCH3peroxideNBSCH2CH3peroxideCH2NBSCHCH2CH2CH3Br2hCH3CHCH3CH3peroxideNBSI2(I2)Cl2.C7H16Cl2.C5H12Cl2hCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3Br2CH3hCH2Cl2Cl2peroxideCHCH3NBSCH3CCH3Cl2hCHCH2CH2CH3Br2hCH2Key Terms
alkane (p.336)
combustion (p.338)

free radical (p.338)

halogenation reaction (p.338)

homolytic bond cleavage (p.338)
initiation step (p.338)
paraffin (p.338)

propagation step (p.338)

radical (p.338)

radical chain reaction (p.338)
radical inhibitor (p.352)
radical substitution reaction (p.339)

reactivity
Ðselectivity principle (p.345)
saturated hydrocarbon (p.336)

termination step (p.339)
BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 356
Problems35721.The deuterium kinetic isotope effect for chlorination of an alkane is defined in the following equation:
Predict whether chlorination or bromination would have a greater deuterium kinetic isotope effect.
22.a.How many monobromination products would be obtained from the radical bromination of methylcyclohexane?
Ignore stereoisomers.b.Which product would be obtained in greatest yield? Explain.

c.How many monobromination products would be obtained if all stereoisomers are included?
23.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
b.Given that the value for the reaction is and the bond dissociation energies for the and
bonds are 101,82,and 102kcalmol,respectively,calculate the bond dissociation energy of the bond.
c.Which set of propagation steps is more likely to occur?
24.a.Calculate the value for the following reaction:
b.Calculate the sum of the values for the following two propagation steps:
c.Why do both calculations give you the same value of 
25.A possible alternative mechanism to that shown in Problem 24 for the monochlorination of methane would involve the following
propagation steps:How do you know that the reaction does not take place by this mechanism?
26.Explain why the rate of bromination of methane is decreased if HBr is added to the reaction mixture.
CH3HHClClHCH3ClHClClClH¡?CH3CH3HHClCl
CH3CH3ClCl
ClClH¡CH3ClHCl
CH4Cl2hH¡OClOHCCl,CH,42 kcalmolH¡CCH3CH3OClCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3OHCH3CH3CH2Clrate of homolytic cleavage of a Crate of homolytic cleavage of a CH bond by ClD bond by Cldeuterium kineticisotope effect  BRUI09-336_358r3  26-03-2003  3:12 PM  Page 357
359The three chapters
in Part III discuss
the reactions of compounds that have an

electron-withdrawing atom or groupÑa

potential leaving groupÑbonded to an
hybridized carbon. These compounds
can undergo substitution and/or elimina-

tion reactions.Chapter 10discusses the substitution reactions of alkyl
halides. Of the different compounds that undergo substi-

tution and elimination reactions,alkyl halides are exam-

ined first because they have relatively good leaving

groups. You will also see the kinds of compounds biolog-

ical organisms use in place of alkyl halides,since alkyl

halides are not readily available in nature.
Chapter 11covers the elimination reactions of alkyl
halides. Because alkyl halides can undergo both substitu-

tion and elimination reactions,this chapter also discusses

the factors that determine whether a given alkyl halide

will undergo a substitution reaction,an elimination reac-

tion,or both substitution and elimination reactions.
Chapter 12discusses compounds other than alkyl
halides that undergo substitution and elimination reac-

tions. You will see that because alcohols and ethers have

relatively poor leaving groups compared with the leaving

groups of alkyl halides,alcohols and ethers must be acti-

vated before the groups can be substituted or eliminated.

Several methods commonly used to activate leaving

groups will be examined. The reactions of thiols and sul-

fides will be compared with those of alcohols and ethers.

By looking at the reactions of epoxides,you will see how

ring strain can affect leaving ability. You will also see

how the carcinogenicity of arene oxides is related to car-

bocation stability. Finally,this chapter will introduce you

to organometallic compounds,a class of compounds that

is very important to synthetic organic chemists.
sp3Substitutionand EliminationReactionsPARTTHREE
Chapter 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesChapter 11Elimination Reactions of AlkylHalides; Competition BetweenSubstitution and EliminationChapter 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds ¥
Organometallic CompoundsBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 359
HXCHHHXCHHOrganiccompounds that have an
electronegative atom or group

bonded to an hybridized carbon
undergo substitution reactions and/or elimina-

tion reactions. In a substitution reaction
,the electroneg-
ative atom or group is replaced by another atom or group. In an 
elimination reaction
,the electronegative atom or group is eliminated,along with a hydrogen from an adja-

cent carbon. The atom or group that is 
substitutedor eliminatedin these reactions iscalled a leaving group
.This chapter focuses on the substitution reactions of alkyl halides
Ñcompounds inwhich the leaving group is a halide ion (or ). The nomenclature of

alkyl halides was discussed in Section2.4.
In Chapter11,we will discuss the elimination reactions of alkyl halides and the factors
that determine whether substitution or elimination will prevail when an alkyl halide

undergoes a reaction.
Alkyl halides are a good family of compounds with which to start our study of sub-
stitution and elimination reactions because they have relatively good leaving groups;

that is,the halide ions are easily displaced. We will then be prepared to discuss,in
alkyl halidesan alkyl fluorideRFan alkyl chlorideRCl
an alkyl bromideRBr
an alkyl iodideRIIF, Cl, Br,a substitution reactionan elimination reactionthe leaving groupRCH2CH2XYRCH2CH2YXRCHCH
2HYXsp336010Substitution Reactionsof Alkyl HalidesBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 360
Section 10.1How Alkyl Halides React
361Chapter12,the substitution and elimination reactions of compounds with leaving
groups that are harder to displace.Substitution reactions are important in organic chemistry because they make it pos-
sible to convert readily available alkyl halides into a wide variety of other compounds.

Substitution reactions are also important in the cells of plants and animals. Because
cells exist in predominantly aqueous environments and alkyl halides are insoluble in

water,biological systems use compounds in which the group that is replaced is more

polar than a halogen and therefore more soluble in water. The reactions of some of

these biological compounds are discussed in this chapter.
10.1How Alkyl Halides ReactA halogen is more electronegative than carbon. Consequently,the two atoms do not
share their bonding electrons equally. Because the more electronegative halogen has a

larger share of the electrons,it has a partial negative charge and the carbon to which it

is bonded has a partial positive charge.
It is the polar carbonÐhalogen bond that causes alkyl halides to undergo substitution
and elimination reactions. There are two important mechanisms for the substitution

reaction:1.A nucleophile is attracted to the partially positively charged carbon (an elec-
trophile). As the nucleophile approaches the carbon and forms a new bond,the

carbonÐhalogen bond breaks heterolytically (the halogen takes both of the bond-
ing electrons).NuNu
CXX
CsubstitutionproductRCH2XF, Cl, Br, I
X
SURVIVAL COMPOUNDS
Several marine organisms,including sponges,
corals,and algae,synthesize organohalides (halo-
gen-containing organic compounds) that they use to deter

predators. For example,red algae synthesize a toxic,foul-

tasting organohalide that keeps predators from eating them.

One predator,however,that is not deterred is a mollusk called 
a sea hare. After consuming red algae,a sea hare converts the
original organohalide into a structurally similar compound it

uses for its own defense. Unlike other mollusks,a sea hare does

not have a shell. Its method of defense is to surround itself with

a slimy material that contains the organohalide,thereby protect-

ing itself from carnivorous fish.
synthesized by red algaeCCH
BrClOsynthesized by the sea harea sea hareCCHHOBrHClOHOBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 361
362CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halides2.The carbon
Ðhalogen bond breaks heterolytically without any assistance from the
nucleophile,forming a carbocation. The carbocation
Ñan electrophileÑthen re-acts with the nucleophile to form the substitution product.Regardless of the mechanism by which a substitution reaction occurs,it is called a
nucleophilic substitution reaction
because a nucleophile substitutes for the halogen.We will see that the mechanism 
that predominates
depends on the following factors:
¥the structure of the alkyl halide
¥the reactivity of the nucleophile
¥the concentration of the nucleophile¥the solvent in which the reaction is carried out
10.2The Mechanism of an Reaction
How is the mechanism of a reaction determined? We can learn a great deal about the
mechanism of a reaction by studying its kineticsÑthe factors that affect the rate of the
reaction.The rate of a nucleophilic substitution reaction such as the reaction of methyl bro-mide with hydroxide ion depends on the concentrations of both reagents. If the con-
centration of methyl bromide in the reaction mixture is doubled,the rate of the

nucleophilic substitution reaction doubles. If the concentration of hydroxide ion is
doubled,the rate of the reaction also doubles. If the concentrations of both reactants

are doubled,the rate of the reaction quadruples.
When you know the relationship between the rate of a reaction and the concentration
of the reactants,you can write a 
rate lawfor the reaction. Because the rate of thereaction of methyl bromide with hydroxide ion is dependent on the concentration of
both reactants,the rate law for the reaction is
As we saw in Section3.7,a proportionality sign can be replaced by an equals sign
and a proportionality constant. The proportionality constant,in this case 
k,is called the
rate constant. The rate constant describes how difficult it is to overcome the energy
barrier of the reactionÑhow hard it is to reach the transition state. The larger the rate
constant,the easier it is to reach the transition state (see Figure 10.3 on p. 365).
Because the rate of this reaction depends on the concentration of two reactants,the re-
action is a second-order reaction
(Section3.7).
ratek[alkyl halide][nucleophile]rate[alkyl halide][nucleophile]methyl bromidemethyl alcohol
CH3BrHOCH3OHBrSN2CCCCXXNuNu

substitutionproductBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 362
Table 10.1
Relative Rates of SN2 Reactions for Several Alkyl HalidesSN2RBrCl
RClBr
CCH3CH3CH3CH3BrCH3BrCH3CH2BrCH3CH2CH2BrCH3CHBr Alkyl halide Class of alkyl halide Relative rate
methyl 1200
primary 40

primary 16

secondarytertiarytoo slow to measure
 1Section 10.2The Mechanism of an Reaction
363SN2Movie:Bimolecular reactionEdward Davies Hughes
(1906Ð1963)was born in NorthWales. He earned two doctoral

degrees:a Ph.D. from the University

of Wales and a D.Sc. from the

University of London,working with

Sir Christopher Ingold. He was a
professor of chemistry at University

College,London.
The ratelaw tells us which molecules are involved in the transition state of the rate-
determining step of the reaction. From the rate law for the reaction of methyl bromide

with hydroxide ion,we know that both methyl bromide and hydroxide ion are involved

in the rate-determining transition state.The reaction of methyl bromide with hydroxide ion is an example of an 
reac-
tion,where 
ÒSÓstands for substitution,ÒNÓfor nucleophilic,and 
Ò2Ófor bimolecu-lar. 
Bimolecularmeans that two molecules are involved in the rate-determining step.
In 1937,Edward Hughes and Christopher Ingold proposed a mechanism for an 

reaction. Remember that a mechanism describes the step-by-step process by which

reactants are converted into products. It is a theory that fits the experimental evi-

dence that has been accumulated concerning the reaction. Hughes and Ingold based
their mechanism for an reaction on the following three pieces of experimental

evidence:
1.The rate of the reaction depends on the concentration of the alkyl halide 
andonthe concentration of the nucleophile. This means that both reactants are involved

in the rate-determining step.2.When the hydrogens of methyl bromide are successively replaced with methyl
groups,the rate of the reaction with a given nucleophile becomes progressively

slower (Table10.1).
3.The reaction of an alkyl halide in which the halogen is bonded to an asymmetric
carbon leads to the formation of only one stereoisomer,and the configuration of

the asymmetric carbon is inverted relative to its configuration in the reacting

alkyl halide.
Hughes and Ingold proposed that an reaction is a 
concertedreactionÑit takes
place in a single step,so no intermediates are formed. The nucleophile attacks the car-

bon bearing the leaving group and displaces the leaving group.
Because a productive collision is a collision in which the nucleophile hits the car-
bon on the side opposite the side bonded to the leaving group,the carbon is said to un-

dergo 
back-side attack. Why does the nucleophile attack from the back side? The
simplest explanation is that the leaving group blocks the approach of the nucleophile

to the front side of the molecule.HOCH
3OHCH3BrBrmechanism of the SN2 reactionSN2SN2SN2SN2Sir Christopher Ingold(1893Ð1970)was born in Ilford,
England. In addition to determining
the mechanism of the reaction,

he was a member of the group that

developed nomenclature for

enantiomers. (See p.188.) He also

participated in developing the theory

of resonance.
SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 363
364CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halidesa. Back-side attackempty antibonding MOfilled bonding MOb. Front-side attackan in-phase
(bonding) 
interactionan in-phase
(bonding) 
interactionan out-of-phase
(antibonding)
interaction*empty antibonding MOfilled bonding MO*NuC
CBrCBr
NuBrCBr
Figure 10.1
(a)Back-side attack results in a
bonding interaction between the
HOMO (the filled nonbonding
orbital) of the nucleophile and the
LUMO (the empty antibonding

orbital) of (b)Front-side

attack would result in both a
bonding and an antibonding
interaction that would cancel out.CBr.s*Molecular orbital theory also explains back-side attack. Recall from Section8.9
that to form a bond,the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) of one species

must interact with the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) of the other. When

the nucleophile approaches the alkyl halide,the filled nonbonding molecular orbital

(the HOMO) of the nucleophile must interact with the empty antibonding molecu-

lar orbital (the LUMO) associated with the bond. Figure10.1ashows that

back-side attack involves a bonding interaction between the nucleophile and the larger

lobe of Compare this with what happens when the nucleophile approaches the

front side of the carbon (Figure10.1b):Both a bonding and an antibonding interaction

occur,and the two cancel each other. Consequently,the best overlap of the interacting

orbitals is achieved through back-side attack. In fact,a nucleophile always approaches

an hybridized carbon from the back side. [We saw back-side attack previously in

the reaction of a bromide ion with a cyclic bromonium ion (Section5.19).]
sp3s*.CBrs*A nucleophile always approaches an 
hybridized carbon on its back side.sp3Viktor Meyer (1848
Ð1897)wasborn in Germany. To prevent him

from becoming an actor,his parents

persuaded him to enter the University

of Heidelberg,where he earned a

Ph.D. in 1867 at the age of 18. He

was a professor of chemistry at the

Universities of Stuttgart and

Heidelberg. He coined the term

ÒstereochemistryÓfor the study of

molecular shapes and was the first 

to describe the effect of steric

hindrance on a reaction.
How does Hughes and Ingold
Õs mechanism account for the three observed pieces of
experimental evidence? The mechanism shows the alkyl halide and the nucleophile

coming together in the transition state of the one-step reaction. Therefore,increasing

the concentration of either of them makes their collision more probable. Thus,the re-

action will follow second-order kinetics,exactly as observed.
Because the nucleophile attacks the back side of the carbon that is bonded to the
halogen,bulky substituents attached to this carbon will make it harder for the nucle-

ophile to get to that side and will therefore decrease the rate of the reaction (Figure10.2).

This explains why substituting methyl groups for the hydrogens in methyl bromide pro-

gressively slows the rate of the substitution reaction (Table10.1). It is the bulk of the

alkyl groups that is responsible for the difference in reactivity.
Steric effectsare caused by groups occupying a certain volume of space. A steric
effect that decreases reactivity is called 
steric hindrance. Steric hindrance resultswhen groups are in the way at the reaction site. Steric hindrance causes alkyl halides to
transition stateHOHOBrBr
C
CCBrHOàBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 364
Section 10.2The Mechanism of an Reaction
365SN2Figure 10.2
The approach of to a methyl
halide, a primary alkyl halide, a
secondary alkyl halide, and a
tertiary alkyl halide. Increasing the
bulk of the substituents bonded to
the carbon that is undergoing
nucleophilic attack decreases access
to the back side of the carbon,
thereby decreasing the rate of anreaction.SN2HOProgress of the reactionFree energyProgress of the reactionFree energyGàGàa.b.
CHHOCHBr    HOCH3Br    HOCH3OH    BrCHOH    BrRRRRBrRRCHHOBr
HHFigure 10.3
Reaction coordinate diagrams for (a)the reaction of methyl bromide with hydroxide ion;
(b)an reaction of a sterically hindered alkyl bromide with hydroxide ion.
SN2SN2have the following relative reactivities in an reaction because,
generally
,primary
alkyl halides are less hindered than secondary alkyl halides,which,in turn,are less

hindered than tertiary alkyl halides:
The threealkyl groups of a tertiary alkyl halide make it impossible for the nucleophile
to come within bonding distance of the tertiary carbon,so tertiary alkyl halides are un-

able to undergo reactions. The reaction coordinate diagrams for the reactions

of unhindered
methyl bromide and a sterically hindered
alkyl bromide show that steric
hindrance raises the energy of the transition state,slowing the reaction (Figure10.3).
The rate of an reaction depends not only on the 
numberof alkyl groups at-
tached to the carbon that is undergoing nucleophilic attack,but also on their size. For

example,while ethyl bromide and propyl bromide are both primary alkyl halides,

ethyl bromide is more than twice as reactive in an reaction because the bulkier

propyl group provides more steric hindrance to back-side attack. Also,although

neopentyl bromide is a primary alkyl halide,it undergoes reactions very slowly

because its single alkyl group is unusually bulky.
SN2SN2SN2SN2S2relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an SN2 reactionmethyl halide  1 alkyl halide  2 alkyl halide  3 alkyl halidemostreactiveleast 
reactiveSN2Tertiary alkyl halides cannot undergo
reactions.
SN23-D Molecules:Methyl chloride;
t-Butyl chlorideFigure10.4shows that as the nucleophile approaches the back side of the carbon of
methyl bromide,the bonds begin to move away from the nucleophile and its

attacking electrons. By the time the transition state is reached,the bonds are all

in the same plane and the carbon is pentacoordinate (fully bonded to three atoms and

partially bonded to two) rather than tetrahedral. As the nucleophilegets closer to the

carbon and the bromine moves farther away from it,the bonds continue to

move in the same direction. Eventually,the bond between the carbon and the nucle-

ophile is fully formed,and the bond between the carbon and bromine is completely

broken,so that the carbon is once again tetrahedral.
CHCHCHCH3CCH2BrCH3CH3neopentyl bromideBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 365
The carbon at which substitution occurs has inverted its configuration during the
course of the reaction,just as an umbrella has a tendency to invert in a windstorm. This

inversion of configuration
is called a Walden inversion
,after Paul Walden,who first
discovered that the configuration of a compound was inverted in an reaction.
Because an reaction takes place with inversion of configuration,only one substitu-
tion product is formed when an alkyl halide
Ñwhose halogen atom is bonded to an asym-metric carbonÑundergoes an reaction. The configuration of that product is inverted
relative to the configuration of the alkyl halide. For example,the substitution product of the

reaction of hydroxide ion with (R)-2-bromopentane is (S)-2-pentanol. Therefore,the
proposed mechanism accounts for the observed configuration of the product.
PROBLEM 1Does increasing the energy barrier to an reaction increase or decrease the magnitude
of the rate constant for the reaction?PROBLEM 2Arrange the following alkyl bromides in order of decreasing reactivity in an 

reaction:1-bromo-2-methylbutane,1-bromo-3-methylbutane,2-bromo-2-methylbutane,

and 1-bromopentane.PROBLEM 3SOLVED
What product would be formed from the reaction of the following?
a.2-bromobutane and hydroxide ion
b.(
R)-2-bromobutane and hydroxide ion
c.(
S)-3-chlorohexane and hydroxide ion
d.3-iodopentane and hydroxide ion
SOLUTION TO 3aThe product is 2-butanol. We know that because the reaction is an
reaction,the configuration of the product is inverted relative to the configuration of
the reactant. The configuration of the reactant is not specified,however,so we cannot spec-

ify the configuration of the product.
CH3CHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3BrBrOH
the configurationis not specifiedSN2SN2SN2SN2the configuration of the product is inverted
relative to the configuration of the reactantBrHOCRRRHHHOBrCRRBr
RHHOR
RHSN2SN2SN2366CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesTutorial: S
N2Paul Walden (1863
Ð1957)was bornin Cesis,Latvia,the son of a farmer.

His parents died when he was a

child. He supported himself at Riga

University and St. Petersburg

University by working as a tutor. He

received a Ph.D. from the University

of Leipzig and returned to Latvia to

become a professor of chemistry at

Riga University. Following the

Russian Revolution,he went back to

Germany to be a professor at the

University of Rostock and,later,at

the University of en.
àthree bonds are in the same planeFigure 10.4
An reaction between hydroxide ion and methyl bromide.
SN2AU:OK as
changed?BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 366
Section 10.3Factors Affecting Reactions
367SN2The weaker the base,the better it is as a leaving group.
10.3Factors Affecting Reactions
The Leaving Group
If an alkyl iodide,an alkyl bromide,an alkyl chloride,and an alkyl fluoride (all with
the same alkyl group) were allowed to react with the same nucleophile under the same

conditions,we would find that the alkyl iodide is the most reactive and the alkyl fluo-

ride is the least reactive.
The only difference among these four reactions is the nature of the leaving group.
From the relative reaction rates,we can see that the iodide ion is the best leaving

group and the fluoride ion is the worst. This brings us to an important rule in organic

chemistryÑone that you will see frequently:
The weaker the basicity of a group,the
better is its leaving ability.
The reason leaving ability depends on basicity is because
weak bases are stable bases
Ñthey readily bear the electrons they formerly shared
with a proton (Section1.18). Because weak bases don
Õt share their electrons well,a
weak base is not bonded as strongly to the carbon as a strong base would be and

aweaker bond is more easily broken (Section1.13).
We have seen that the halide ions have the following relative basicities (or relative
stabilities) because larger atoms are better able to stabilize their negative charge

(Section1.18):
Because stable (weak) bases are better leaving groups,the halides have the following
relative leaving abilities:
Therefore,alkyl iodides are the most reactive of the alkyl halides,and alkyl fluorides are
the least reactive. In fact,the fluoride ion is such a strong base that alkyl fluorides

essentially do not undergo reactions.
In Section10.1,we saw that it is the polar carbon
Ðhalogen bond that causes alkyl
halides to undergo substitution reactions. Carbon and iodine,however,have the same

electronegativity. (See Table1.3on p.10.) Why,then,does an alkyl halide undergo a

substitution reaction? We know that larger atoms are more polarizable than smaller

atoms. (Recall from Section2.9that polarizability is a measure of how easily an

atomÕs electron cloud can be distorted.) The high polarizability of the large iodine
atom causes it to react as if it were polar even though,on the basis of the electronega-

tivity of the atoms,the bond is nonpolar.
relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an SN2 reactionRI      RBr    RCl    RFleast reactivemost reactiveSN2relative leaving abilities of the halide ionsI      Br    Cl      Fworst leavinggroupbest leaving
grouprelative basicities of the halide ionsI    Br    Cl    Fstrongest base,least stable baseweakest base,most stable baseRCH2IRCH
2OHHOIrelative rates of reaction30,000RCH2BrRCH
2OHHOBr10,000RCH2ClRCH
2OHHOCl200RCH2FRCH
2OHHOF1SN2Stable bases are weak bases.
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 367
368CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesThe NucleophileWhen we talk about atoms or molecules that have lone-pair electrons,sometimes we
call them bases and sometimes we call them nucleophiles. What is the difference be-

tween a base and a nucleophile?Basicityis a measure of how well a compound (a 
base) shares its lone pair with aproton. The stronger the base,the better it shares its electrons. Basicity is measured by

an equilibrium constant(the acid dissociation constant,) that indicates the tenden-
cy of the conjugate acid of the base to lose a proton (Section1.17).
Nucleophilicityis a measure of how readily a compound (a 
nucleophile) is able toattack an electron-deficient atom. Nucleophilicity is measured by a 
rate constant
(k).In the case of an reaction,nucleophilicity is a measure of how readily the nucle-

ophile attacks an hybridized carbon bonded to a leaving group.
When comparing molecules with the same attacking atom,
there is a direct relation-ship between basicity and nucleophilicity:Stronger bases are better nucleophiles. For

example,a species with a negative charge is a stronger base 
anda better nucleophilethan a species with the same attacking atom that is neutral. Thus is a stronger

base and a better nucleophile than stronger base,weaker base,
better nucleophilepoorer nucleophile
When comparing molecules with attacking atoms of approximately the same size,
the stronger bases are again the better nucleophiles. The atoms across the second row of

the periodic table have approximately the same size. If hydrogens are attached to the

second-row elements,the resulting compounds have the following relative acidities

(Section1.18):
Consequently,the conjugate bases have the following relative base strengths and
nucleophilicities:Note that the amide anion is the strongest base,as well as the best nucleophile.
When comparing molecules with attacking atoms that are very different in size,
an-other factor comes into play
Ñthe polarizability of the atom. Because the electrons arefarther away in the larger atom,they are not held as tightly and can,therefore,move

more freely toward a positive charge. As a result,the electrons are able to overlap from

farther away with the orbital of carbon,as shown in Figure10.5. This results in a

greater degree of bonding in the transition state,making it more stable. Whether the

greater polarizability of the larger atoms makes up for their decreased basicity depends

on the conditions under which the reaction is carried out.relative base strengths and relative nucleophilicitiesNH2    HO      Fstrongestbasebest nucleophilerelative acid strengthsNH3      H2O      HFweakestacidHOCH3ONH2CH3CH2NH      

      H2OCH3OHNH3CH3CH2NH2H2O.HOsp3SN2aBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 368
Section 10.3Factors Affecting Reactions
369SN2HXCHHCHXCHHItransition stateHXCHHCHXCHHFtransition statemore bondinglittle bondingFigure 10.5
An iodide ion is larger and morepolarizable than a fluoride ion.
Therefore, the relatively loosely
held electrons of the iodide ion can
overlap from farther away with the
orbital of carbon undergoing
nucleophilic attack. The tightly
bound electrons of the fluoride ion
cannot start to overlap until the
atoms are closer together.
If the reaction is carried out in the gas phase,the direct relationship between basici-
ty and nucleophilicity is maintainedÑthe stronger bases are still the best nucleophiles.If,however,the reaction is carried out in a protic solvent
Ñmeaning the solvent mole-
cules have a hydrogen bonded to an oxygen or to a nitrogen
Ñthe relationship betweenbasicity and nucleophilicity becomes inverted. The largest atom is the best nucleophile

even though it is the weakest base. Therefore,iodide ion is the best nucleophile of the

halide ions in a protic solvent.
PROBLEM 4a.Which is a stronger base,or 
b.Which is a better nucleophile in an aqueous solution?
The Effect of the Solvent on Nucleophilicity
Why,in a protic solvent,is the smallest atom the poorest nucleophile even though it is
the strongest base? How does a protic solvent make strong bases less nucleophilic
?When a negatively charged species is placed in a protic solvent,the ion becomes sol-

vated (Section2.9). Protic solvents are hydrogen bond donors. The solvent molecules

arrange themselves so that their partially positively charged hydrogens point toward

the negatively charged species. The interaction between the ion and the dipole of the

protic solvent is called an 
ionÐdipole interaction. Because the solvent shields the nu-
cleophile,at least one of the ion
Ðdipole interactions must be broken before the nucle-
ophile can participate in an reaction. Weak bases interact weakly with protic

solvents,whereas strong bases interact more strongly because they are better at shar-

ing their electrons. It is easier,therefore,to break the ion
Ðdipole interactions betweenSN2RS?ROincreasingbasicityincreasingnucleophilicityin the gas phaseincreasingsizeincreasingnucleophilicityin a proticsolventFClBrIA protic solvent contains a hydrogen
bonded to an oxygen or a nitrogen; 

it is a hydrogen bond donor.
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 369
370CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesAn aprotic solvent does not contain a
hydrogen bonded to either an oxygen

or a nitrogen; it is not a hydrogen bond

donor.
an iodide ion (a weak base) and the solvent than between a fluoride ion (a stronger
base) and the solvent. As a result,iodide ion is a better nucleophile than fluoride ion in

a protic solvent (Table10.2).
Fluoride ion would be a better nucleophile in a 
nonpolar solventthan in a polar sol-vent because there would be no ion
Ðdipole interactions between the ion and the nonpo-
lar solvent. However,ionic compounds are insoluble in most nonpolar solvents,but they

can dissolve in aprotic polar solvents,such as dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl-

sulfoxide (DMSO). An aproticpolar solvent is not a hydrogen bond donor because it

does not have a hydrogen attached to an oxygen or to a nitrogen,so there are no posi-

tively charged hydrogens to form ion
Ðdipole interactions. The molecules of an aprotic
polar solvent have a partial negative charge on their surface that can solvate cations,but

the partial positive charge is on the 
insideof the molecule,which makes it less accessi-
ble. The relatively 
Ònaked
Óanion can be a powerful nucleophile in an aprotic polar sol-
vent. Fluoride ion,therefore,is a better nucleophile in DMSO than it is in water.
PROBLEM 5Indicate whether each of the following solvents is protic or aprotic:
a.chloroform c.acetic acid 
b.diethyl ether d.hexane [CH
3(CH2)4CH3](CH3CH2OCH2CH3)(CH3COOH)(CHCl3)HHOYHHOHHOHHOionÐdipole interactions between a nucleophile 

and water3-D Molecules:N,N-Dimethylformamide;Dimethyl sulfoxideN,N-dimethylformamideDMFCHCH3OCH3Ndimethyl sulfoxideDMSOH3CCH
3the  is on the surfaceof the molecule SOthe  is notvery accessibleCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3SSOOOKOSSDMSO can solvate a cation better than it can solvate an anion        increasing nucleophilicityTable 10.2
Relative Nucleophilicity Toward CH
3l in MethanolRS      I    C    N      CH3O   Br    NH3      Cl   F    CH3OHBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 370
Section 10.3Factors Affecting Reactions
371SN2ethoxide iontert-butoxide ionNucleophilicity Is Affected by Steric Effects
Base strength is relatively unaffected by steric effects because a base removes a
relatively unhindered proton. The strength of a base depends only on how well the

base shares its electrons with a proton. Thus,
tert-butoxide ion is a stronger base
than ethoxide ion since tert-butanol is a weaker acid than ethanol
Steric effects,on the other hand,do affect nucleophilicity. A bulky nucleophile
cannot approach the back side of a carbon as easily as a less sterically hindered nucle-
ophile can. Thus,the bulky 
tert-butoxide ion,with its three methyl groups,is a poorer
nucleophile than ethoxide ion even though 
tert-butoxide ion is a stronger base.
PROBLEM 6SOLVED
List the following species in order of 
decreasing
nucleophilicity in an aqueous solution:SOLUTIONLetÕs first divide the nucleophiles into groups. We have one nucleophile
with a negatively charged sulfur,three with negatively charged oxygens,and one with a

neutral oxygen. We know that in the polar aqueous solvent,the one with the negatively

charged sulfur is the most nucleophilic because sulfur is larger than oxygen. We also know

that the poorest nucleophile is the one with the neutral oxygen atom. So now,to complete

the problem,we need to rank the three nucleophiles with negatively charged oxygens in

order of the Õs of their conjugate acids. A carboxylic acid is a stronger acid than
phenol,which is a stronger acid than water (Section7.10). Because water is the weakest

acid,its conjugate base is the strongest base and the best nucleophile. Thus,the relative

nucleophilicities arePROBLEM 7For each of the following pairs of reactions,indicate which reaction occurs faster:
a.b.c.d.CH3CH2ClICH3CH2BrIor(in ethanol)CH3CH2ClCH3OCH3CH2ClCH3SorCH3CHCH2BrCH
3CH2CHBrHOCH3HOorCH3CH3CH2BrCH
3CH2BrH2OHOorSN2CH3COCH3S
HOCH3OHOOpaCH3COCH3OHHO
OCH3SOethoxide ionbetter nucleophiletert-butoxide ionstronger baseCH3COCH3CH2OCH3CH3pa15.9.pa18BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 371
372CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halides10.4The Reversibility of an Reaction
Many different kinds of nucleophiles can react with alkyl halides. Therefore,a wide
variety of organic compounds can be synthesized by means of reactions.
It may seem that the reverse of each of these reactions can also occur via nucleophilic
substitution. In the first reaction,for example,ethyl chloride reacts with hydroxide ion

to form ethyl alcohol and a chloride ion. The reverse reaction would appear to satisfy the

requirements for a nucleophilic substitution reaction,given that chloride ion is a nucle-

ophile and ethyl alcohol has an leaving group. But ethyl alcohol and chloride ion

do notreact.Why does a nucleophilic substitution reaction take place in one direction,but not in
the other? We can answer this question by comparing the leaving tendency of in

the forward direction and the leaving tendency of in the reverse direction. Com-

paring leaving tendencies involves comparing basicities. Most people find it easier to

compare the acid strengths of the conjugate acids (Table10.3),so we will compare the

acid strengths of HCl and HCl is a much stronger acid than which means

that is a much weaker base than (Remember,the stronger the acid,the

weaker is its conjugate base.) Because it is a weaker base,is a better leaving

group. Consequently,can displace in the forward reaction,but cannot

displace in the reverse reaction. The reaction proceeds in the direction that al-

lows the stronger base to displace the weaker base (the best leaving group).
If the difference between the basicities of the nucleophile and the leaving group is
not very large,the reaction will be reversible. For example,in the reaction of ethyl bro-

mide with iodide ion,is the leaving group in one direction and is the leaving

group in the other direction. The reaction is reversible because the values of the

conjugate acids of the two leaving groups are similar (of of
see Table10.3).
You can drive a reversible reaction toward the desired products by removing one of
the products as it is formed. Recall that the concentrations of the reactants and
products at equilibrium are governed by the equilibrium constant of the reaction
CH3CH2BrBr
CH3CH2IIan SN2 reaction isreversible when the
basicities of the leaving
groups are similarHI10;HBr9; papapaIBrHOClClHOClHO.ClH2O,H2O.HOClHONNCRan alcohola thiolCH3CH2ClCH
3CH2OHCl
HOCH3CH2BrCH
3CH2SHBr
HSan ethera thioetherCH3CH2ICH
3CH2ORI
ROCH3CH2BrCH
3CH2SRBr
RSa primary amineCH3CH2ClCH
3CH2NH2ClNH2an alkynea nitrileCH3CH2BrCH3CH2CBr
CRCCH3CH2ICH
3CH2CICSN2SN2An reaction proceeds in the
direction that allows the stronger 

base to displace the weaker base.SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 372
Section 10.4The Reversibility of an Reaction
373SN2(Section3.7). 
Le Ch›telierÕs principlestates that if an equilibrium is disturbed,the
system will adjust to offset the disturbance
. In other words,if the concentration of
product C is decreased,A and B will react to form more C and D to maintain the value

of the equilibrium constant.For example,the reaction of ethyl chloride with methanol is reversible because the
difference between the basicities of the nucleophile and the leaving group is not very

large. If the reaction is carried out in a neutral solution,the protonated product will

lose a proton (Section1.20),disturbing the equilibrium and driving the reaction

toward the products.
fastClHCH3CH2ClCH
3OHCH
3CH2OCH3CH3CH2OCH3HADCKeq  B[C][D][A][B]SO3HHIHBr
HCl
H2SO4CH3OH2H3OCH3COH10.09.07.05.02.51.70.6IBrClOSO3HCH3OHH2OHFOCH3COO3.24.8H2SHS
7.0HCN
HCCHC
C9.1NH4NH39.4CH3CH2SHCH
3CH2S.5(CH3)3NH(CH
3)3N.8CH3OHCH
3O.5H2OHO
.7HCNH3NH2H2H~40FSO3NTable 10.3
The Acidities of the Conjugate Acids of Some Leaving Groups
AcidConjugate base (leaving group)
pKaIf an equilibrium is disturbed, the system will adjust to offset the

disturbance.BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 373
374CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesPROBLEM 8SOLVED
What product is obtained when ethylamine reacts with excess methyl iodide in a basic so-
lution of potassium carbonate?SOLUTIONMethyl iodide and ethylamine undergo an reaction. The product of the
reaction is a secondary amine,which is predominantly in its basic (neutral) form since the

reaction is carried out in a basic solution. The secondary amine can undergo an reac-

tion with another equivalent of methyl iodide,forming a tertiary amine. The tertiary amine

can react with methyl iodide in yet another reaction. The final product of the reaction

is a quaternary ammonium iodide.PROBLEM 9a.Explain why the reaction of an alkyl halide with ammonia gives a low yield of primary
amine.b.Explain why a much better yield of primary amine is obtained from the reaction of an
alkyl halide with azide ion followed by catalytic hydrogenation. (
Hint:An alkyl
azide is not nucleophilic.)PROBLEM 10Using the values listed in Table10.3,convince yourself that each of the reactions on

page372 proceeds in the direction shown.
PROBLEM 11What is the product of the reaction of ethyl bromide with each of the following nucleophiles?
a.b.c.d.
PROBLEM 12The reaction of an alkyl chloride with potassium iodide is generally carried out in acetone
to maximize the amount of alkyl iodide that is formed. Why does the solvent increase 

the yield of alkyl iodide? (
Hint:Potassium iodide is soluble in acetone,but potassium
chloride is not.)CH3CH2S(CH3)3N N3CH3OHpaCH3CH2CH2NNN
N2CH3CH2CH2NH2N3CH3CH2CH2BrH2Ptan alkyl azide(N3),CH3CH2NH2CH3CH3CH2NHCH3ICH3CH2NHCH3CH3CH3CH2NH2IICH3ICH3CH3CH3CH3IK2CO3CH3CH2NCH3CH3CH2NCH3CH3IK2CO3SN2SN2SN2CH3CH3CH2NH2?IK2CO3excessHenri Louis Le Ch›telier(1850Ð1936)was born in France. 
He studied mining engineering and
was particularly interested in learning

how to prevent explosions. His interest

in mine safety is understandable,

considering that his father was
France
Õs inspector-general of mines.
Le Ch›telierÕs research into
preventing explosions led him to study

heat and its measurement,which in

turn focused his interest on

thermodynamics.BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 374
Section 10.5The Mechanism of an Reaction
375SN110.5The Mechanism of an Reaction
Given our understanding of reactions,we would expect the rate of reaction of 
tert-butyl bromide with water to be relatively slow because water is a poor nucleophile and

tert-butyl bromide is sterically hindered to attack by a nucleophile. It turns out,how-
ever,that the reaction is surprisingly fast. In fact,it is over one million times faster

than the reaction of methyl bromideÑa compound with no steric hindranceÑwithwater (Table10.4). Clearly,the reaction must be taking place by a mechanism differ-

ent from that of an reaction.
As we have seen,a study of the kinetics of a reaction is one of the first steps
undertaken when one is investigating the mechanism of a reaction. If we were to

investigate the kinetics of the reaction of 
tert-butyl bromide with water,we would find
that doubling the concentration of the alkyl halide doubles the rate of the reaction. We

would also find that changing the concentration of the nucleophile has no effect on the

rate of the reaction. Knowing that the rate of this nucleophilic substitution reaction

depends only on the concentration of the alkyl halide,we can write the following rate

law for the reaction:
Because the rate of the reaction depends on the concentration of only one reactant,the
reaction is a first-order reaction
.The rate law for the reaction of 
tert-butyl bromide with water differs from the rate
law for the reaction of methyl bromide with hydroxide ion (Section10.2),so the two

reactions must have different mechanisms. We have seen that the reaction between

methyl bromide and hydroxide ion is an reaction. The reaction between 
tert-butyl
SN2ratek[alkyl halide]tert-butyl bromideCH2OCH3CH3CH3Brtert-butyl alcoholCHBrCH3CH3CH3OHSN2SN2SN1WHY CARBON INSTEAD OF SILICON?There are two reasons living organisms are com-
posed primarily of carbon,oxygen,hydrogen,and nitrogen:the

fitness
of these elements for specific roles in life processes and
their availabilityin the environment. Of the two reasons,fitness
was probably more important than availability because carbon

rather than silicon became the fundamental building block of

living organisms,even though silicon is just below carbon in

the periodic table and,as the following table shows,is more

than 140 times more abundant than carbon in the Earth
Õs crust.Abundance (atoms100 atoms)
ElementIn living organismsIn Earth
Õs crustH490.22
C250.19
O2547

N0.30.1
Si0.0328
Why are hydrogen,carbon,oxygen,and nitrogen so fit for the
roles they play in living organisms? First and foremost,they are

among the smallest atoms that form covalent bonds,and car-

bon,oxygen,and nitrogen can also form multiple bonds. Be-

cause the atoms are small and can form multiple bonds,they

form strong bonds that give rise to stable molecules. The com-

pounds that make up living organisms must be stable and,

therefore,slow to react if the organisms are to survive.
Silicon has almost twice the diameter of carbon,so silicon
forms longer and weaker bonds. Consequently,an reaction

at silicon would occur much more rapidly than an reaction

at carbon. Moreover,silicon has another problem. The end

product of carbon metabolism is The analogous product

of silicon metabolism would be Because silicon is only

singly bonded to oxygen in silicon dioxide molecules

polymerize to form quartz (sea sand). It is hard to imagine that

life could exist,much less proliferate,were animals to exhale

sea sand instead of CO2  !SiO2,SiO2.CO2.SN2SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 375
376CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halidesbromide and water is an 
reaction
,where 
ÒSÓstands for substitution,ÒNÓstandsfor nucleophilic,and 
Ò1Óstands for unimolecular. 
Unimolecularmeans that only onemolecule is involved in the rate-determining step. The mechanism of an reaction

is based on the following experimental evidence:
1.The rate law shows that the rate of the reaction depends only on the concentra-
tion of the alkyl halide. This means that we must be observing a reaction whose

rate-determining step involves only the alkyl halide.
2.When the methyl groups of 
tert-butyl bromide are successively replaced by hy-
drogens,the rate of the reaction decreases progressively (Table10.4). This

is opposite to the order of reactivity exhibited by alkyl halides in reactions

(Table10.1).
3.The reaction of an alkyl halide in which the halogen is bonded to an asymmetric
carbon forms two stereoisomers:one with the same relative configuration at the

asymmetric carbon as the reacting alkyl halide,the other with the inverted

configuration.
SN2SN1SN1SN13-D Molecules:t-Butyl bromide;t-Butyl cation;protonated t-Butyl alcohol;t-Butyl alcoholTable 10.4   Relative Rates of S
N1 Reactions for Several Alkyl Bromides
(solvent is H2O, nucleophile is H2O) tertiarysecondary
primarymethylAlkyl bromideClass of alkyl bromideRelative rate
CH3CCH3CHBr1,200,000
CH3CHCH3Br11.6
CH3CH2Br1.00*
CHBr1.05*
33*Although the rate of the SN1 reaction of this compound with water is 0, a small rate is observed as a result of an S
N2reaction.Unlike an reaction,where the leaving group departs and the nucleophile ap-
proaches at the same time,the leaving group in an reaction departs 
before
the nu-cleophile approaches. In the first step of an reaction of an alkyl halide,the

carbonÐhalogen bond breaks heterolytically,with the halogen retaining the previously
shared pair of electrons,and a carbocation intermediate is formed. In the second step,

the nucleophile reacts rapidly with the carbocation to form a protonated alcohol.

Whether the alcohol product will exist in its acidic (protonated) form or basic (neutral)

form depends on the pH of the solution. At the alcohol will exist predomi-

nantly in its basic form.Because the rate of an reaction depends only on the concentration of the alkyl
halide,the first step must be the slow and rate-determining step. The nucleophile,

therefore,is not involved in the rate-determining step,so its concentration has no
SN1pH7,SN1SN1SN2slowfastfast
mechanism of the SN1 reactionCCH3CH3CH3BrBrCH2OCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CH3OCH3CH3CH3OHHOHOHHproton transferproton transferC     Br bond breaks
heterolyticallyproton transfernucleophile attacks the carbocationBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 376
Section 10.5The Mechanism of an Reaction
377SN1effect on the rate of the reaction. If you look at the reaction coordinate diagram in
Figure10.6,you will see why increasing the rate of the second step will not make an
reaction go any faster.
How does the mechanism for an reaction account for the three pieces of exper-
imental evidence? First,because the alkyl halide is the only species that participates in

the rate-determining step,the mechanism agrees with the observation that the rate of

the reaction depends on the concentration of the alkyl halide and does not depend on

the concentration of the nucleophile.Second,the mechanism shows that a carbocation is formed in the rate-determining
step of an reaction. We know that a tertiary carbocation is more stable,and is

therefore easier to form,than a secondary carbocation,which in turn is more stable

and easier to form than a primary carbocation (Section4.2). Tertiary alkyl halides,

therefore,are more reactive than secondary alkyl halides,which are more reactive than

primary alkyl halides in an reaction. This relative order of reactivity agrees with

the observation that the rate of an reaction decreases as the methyl groups of 
tert-butyl bromide are successively replaced by hydrogens (Table10.4).
Actually,primary carbocations and methyl cations are so unstable that primary alkyl
halides and methyl halides do not undergo reactions. (The very slow reactions

reported for ethyl bromide and methyl bromide in Table10.4are really reactions.)
The positively charged carbon of the carbocation intermediate is hybridized,
and the three bonds connected to an hybridized carbon are in the same plane. In

the second step of the reaction,the nucleophile can approach the carbocation from

either side of the plane.SN1sp2sp2SN2SN1relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an S
N1 reaction
3 alkyl halide 
 2 alkyl halide 
 1 alkyl halide
least reactivemost reactiveSN1SN1SN1SN1SN1XR  X H2O H3OOHROHRRFree energyGàcarbocationintermediaterate-determiningstepProgress of the reactionHFigure 10.6
Reaction coordinate diagram for anreaction.SN1HHBrBrCBrCH2OOH2CHO
HHOCCOH
HOHCbabainverted configurationrelative to the configuration
of the alkyl halidesame configuration
as the alkyl halidePrimary alkyl halides and methyl halidescannot undergo reactions.
SN1Tutorial:
SN1BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 377
378CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesIf the nucleophile attacks the side of the carbon from which the leaving group depart-
ed,the product will have the same relative configuration as that of the reacting alkyl

halide. If,however,the nucleophile attacks the opposite side of the carbon,the product

will have the inverted configuration relative to the configuration of the alkyl halide.

We can now understand the third piece of experimental evidence for the mechanism of

an reaction:An reaction of an alkyl halide in which the leaving group is at-

tached to an asymmetric carbon forms two stereoisomers because attack of the nucleo-

phile on one side of the planar carbocation forms one stereoisomer and attack on the

other side produces the other stereoisomer.
PROBLEM 13Arrange the following alkyl bromides in order of decreasing reactivity in an reaction:
isopropyl bromide,propyl bromide,
tert-butyl bromide,methyl bromide.
PROBLEM 14Why are the rates of the reactions of ethyl bromide and methyl bromide given in
Table10.4so slow?
10.6Factors Affecting Reactions
The Leaving Group
Because the rate-determining step of an reaction is the dissociation of the alkyl
halide to form a carbocation,two factors affect the rate of an reaction:the ease

with which the leaving group dissociates from the carbon and the stability of the car-

bocation that is formed. In the preceding section,we saw that tertiary alkyl halides are

more reactive than secondary alkyl halides,which are more reactive than primary alkyl

halides. This is because the more substituted the carbocation is,the more stable it is

and therefore the easier it is to form. But how do we rank the relative reactivity of a se-

ries of alkyl halides with different leaving groups that dissociate to form the same car-

bocation? As in the case of the reaction,there is a direct relationship between

basicity and leaving ability in the reaction:The weaker the base,the less tightly it

is bonded to the carbon and the easier it is to break the carbonÐhalogen bond. As a re-
sult,an alkyl iodide is the most reactive and an alkyl fluoride is the least reactive of the

alkyl halides in both and reactions.
relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an S
N1 reaction
RI    RBr      RCl      RFleast reactivemost reactiveSN2SN1SN1SN2SN1SN1SN1SN2SN1if the leaving group in an SN1 reaction is attached to an asymmetriccarbon, a pair of enantiomers will be formed as productsHBrH2ORRRHHOBrCRRBr
RHHORR
RHRHCRRHCHOHOHSN1SN1BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 378
Section 10.6Factors Affecting Reactions
379SN1The NucleophileThe nucleophile reacts with the carbocation that is formed in the rate-determining stepof an reaction. Because the nucleophile comes into play 
afterthe rate-determiningstep,the reactivity of the nucleophile has no effect on the rate of an reaction

(Figure10.6).
In most reactions,the solvent is the nucleophile. For example,the relative rates
given in Table10.4are for the reactions of alkyl halides with water in water. Water

serves as both the nucleophile and the solvent. Reaction with a solvent is called

solvolysis
. Thus,each rate in Table10.4is for the solvolysis of the indicated alkyl bro-
mide in water.
Carbocation RearrangementsA carbocation intermediate is formed in an reaction. In Section4.6,we saw that a

carbocation will rearrange if it becomes more stable in the process. If the carbocation
formed in an reaction can rearrange,and reactions of the same alkyl

halide can produce different constitutional isomers as products,since a carbocation is

not formed in an reaction and therefore the carbon skeleton cannot rearrange. For

example,the product obtained when is substituted for in 2-bromo-3-

methylbutane by an reaction is different from the product obtained by an re-

action. When the reaction is carried out under conditions that favor an reaction,

the initially formed secondary carbocation undergoes a 1,2-hydride shift to form a

more stable tertiary carbocation.The product obtained from the reaction of 3-bromo-2,2-dimethylbutane with a nu-
cleophile also depends on the conditions under which the reaction is carried out. The

carbocation formed under conditions that favor an reaction will undergo a

1,2-methyl shift. Because a carbocation is not formed under conditions that favor an
reaction,the carbon skeleton does not rearrange. In Sections10.9and 10.10,we
will see that we can exercise some control over whether an or an reaction

takes place,by selecting appropriate reaction conditions.
SN2SN1SN2SN1SN1SN2SN1BrHOSN2SN2SN1SN1SN1SN1SN1SN1SN11,2-hydride shiftSN2HOsecondarycarbocation3-methyl-2-butanol2-bromo-3-methylbutaneCH3CHCHCH3CH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3H2OH2OH2OH3OtertiarycarbocationCH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3OHBrCH3CCH2CH3CH3OHHBrBr2-methyl-2-butanolCH3CCH2CH3CH3OHSN11,2-methyl shiftSN2HOsecondarycarbocation3,3-dimethyl-2-butanol3-bromo-2,2-dimethylbutaneCHCH3CH3CCHCH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CCHCH3CH3CCHCH3CH3CCH3CH3H2OH2OCH3CH3OHCH3CH3tertiarycarbocationCH3CH3BrCH3OHHCH32,3-dimethyl-2-butanolCH3OHCH
3H2OH3OBrBrWhen a reaction forms a carbocation
intermediate, always check for the
possibility of a carbocation
rearrangement.
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 379
PROBLEM 15Arrange the following alkyl halides in order of decreasing reactivity in an reaction:
2-bromopentane,2-chloropentane,1-chloropentane,3-bromo-3-methylpentane.
PROBLEM 16Which of the following alkyl halides form a substitution product in an reaction that is

different from the substitution product formed in an reaction?
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
PROBLEM 17Two substitution products result from the reaction of 3-chloro-3-methyl-1-butene with
sodium acetate in acetic acid under conditions. Identify the products.
10.7More About the Stereochemistry
of and ReactionsThe Stereochemistry of Reactions
The reaction of 2-bromopropane with hydroxide ion forms a substitution productwithout any asymmetric carbons. The product,therefore,has no stereoisomers.
The reaction of 2-bromobutane with hydroxide ion forms a substitution product with
an asymmetric carbon. The product,therefore,can exist as enantiomers.
We cannot specify the configuration of the product formed from the reaction of
2-bromobutane with hydroxide ion unless we know the configuration of the alkyl

halide and whether the reaction is an or an reaction. For example,if we know

that the reaction is an reaction and that the reactant has the 
Sconfiguration,we
know that the product will be (
R)-2-butanol because in an reaction,the incoming
nucleophile attacks the back side of the carbon that is attached to the halogen
(Section10.2). Therefore,the product will have a configuration that is inverted relative

to that of the reactant. (Recall that an reaction takes place with 
inversion of
configuration
).SN2SN2SN2SN1SN2Br2-bromobutane2-butanol
BrCH3CHCH2CH3HOCH3CHCH2CH3OHasymmetric carbonasymmetric carbon
2-bromopropane2-propanol
BrCH3CHCH3HOCH3CHCH3OHBrSN2SN1SN2SN1(CH3COO Na)CH3BrCH3CHCH2CCH3CH3CH3ClCH3ClCH2BrCHCH3CH3CH2CCH3BrCH3CH3CHCHCHCH3CH3BrCH3SN2SN1SN1380CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 380
Section 10.7More About the Stereochemistry of and Reactions
381SN1SN2The Stereochemistry of Reactions
In contrast to the reaction,the reaction of (
S)-2-bromobutane forms two
substitution productsÑone with the same relative configuration as the reactant and the
other with the inverted configuration. In an reaction,the leaving group leaves

before the nucleophile attacks. This means that the nucleophile is free to attack either

side of the planar carbocation. If it attacks the side from which the bromide ion left,
the product will have the same relative configuration as the reactant. If it attacks the

opposite side,the product will have the inverted configuration.
Although you might expect that equal amounts of both products should be formed
in an reaction,a greater amount of the product with the inverted configuration is

obtained in most cases. Typically,50
Ð70% of the product of an reaction is the in-
verted product. If the reaction leads to equal amounts of the two stereoisomers,the re-

action is said to take place with 
complete racemization. When more of one of the
products is formed,the reaction is said to take place with 
partial racemization.Saul Winstein was the first to explain why extra inverted product generally is
formed in an reaction. He postulated that dissociation of the alkyl halide initially

results in the formation of an intimate ion pair. In an intimate ion pair,the bond be-
tween the carbon and the leaving group has broken,but the cation and anion remain

next to each other. This species then forms a 
solvent-separated ion pair
Ñan ion pair inwhich one or more solvent molecules have come between the cation and the anion.

Further separation between the two results in dissociated ions.
The nucleophile can attack any of these four species. If the nucleophile attacks only
the completely dissociated carbocation,the product will be completely racemized. If

the nucleophile attacks the carbocation of either the intimate ion pair or the solvent-

separated ion pair,the leaving group will be in position to partially block the approach

of the nucleophile to that side of the carbocation and more of the product with the in-
verted configuration will be obtained.(Notice that if the nucleophile attacks the undis-

sociated molecule,the reaction will be an reaction and all of the product will have

the inverted configuration.)
SN2solventundissociatedmoleculeRXintimateion pairRXsolvent-separatedion pairRXdissociated ionsRXSN1SN1SN1(S)-2-bromobutane(
R)-2-butanolH2O
HBrCCH3CH3CH2CH3HHHOOHBrCCH2CH3(S)-2-butanolproduct withinverted
configurationproduct withretained
configurationCCH3CH2CH3HSN1 conditionsSN1SN1SN2SN1(S)-2-bromobutane(
R)-2-butanolBrHOCCH3CH3CH2CH3HHHOBrCCH2CH3SN2 conditionsthe configuration is invertedrelative to that of the reactantAn reaction takes place with
inversion of configuration.SN2An reaction takes place with
racemization.SN1Saul Winstein (1912
Ð1969)wasborn in Montreal,Canada. He

received a Ph.D. from the California

Institute of Technology and was a

professor of chemistry at the

University of California,Los Angeles,

from 1942 until his death.
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 381
The difference between the products obtained from an reaction and from an
reaction is a little easier to visualize in the case of cyclic compounds. For exam-
ple,when 
cis-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexane undergoes an reaction,only the
trans product is obtained because the carbon bonded to the leaving group is attacked

by the nucleophile only on its back side.However,when 
cis-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexane undergoes an reaction,both
the cis and the trans products are formed because the nucleophile can approach the
carbocation intermediate from either side.PROBLEM 18If the products of the preceding reaction are not obtained in equal amounts,which
stereoisomer will be present in excess?
PROBLEM 19Give the products that will be obtained from the following reactions if
a.the reaction is carried out under conditions that favor an reaction
b.the reaction is carried out under conditions that favor an reaction
1.
2.PROBLEM 20Which of the following reactions will go faster if the concentration of the nucleophile is
increased?BrSCH
3CH3SCH3OBrBrBrBrHOCH3HOOBrOCCH3CH3COa.b.c.cis-1-chloro-2-methylcyclobutanesodium hydroxidewatertrans-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexanesodium methoxidemethanolSN1SN2SN1SN2SN2SN1Br has diffused away, giving H2Oequal access to both sides of the
carbocationCH2OCH3CH2CH3HBr has not diffused away, so it blocksthe approach of H2O to one side of thecarbocationCBrH2OCH3CH2CH3HH2OH2O382CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesMovies:inversion; retentionSN1SN1HOSN2 conditionsBrcis-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexanetrans-4-methylcyclohexanolHBrHCH3OH
BrHCH3H2OSN1 conditionsHBrcis-1-bromo-4-methylcyclohexanetrans-4-methylcyclohexanolcis-4-methylcyclohexanolOHHHCH3H
BrHCH3H
OHHCH3BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 382
Section 10.8Benzylic Halides, Allylic Halides, Vinylic Halides, and Aryl Halides
38310.8Benzylic Halides, Allylic Halides,Vinylic Halides, and Aryl Halides
Our discussion of substitution reactions,to this point,has been limited to methyl
halides and primary,secondary,and tertiary alkyl halides. But what about benzylic,

allylic,vinylic,and aryl halides? Let
Õs first consider benzylic and allylic halides. Ben-
zylic and allylic halides readily undergo reactions unless they are tertiary. Tertiary

benzylic and tertiary allylic halides,like other tertiary halides,are unreactive in 

reactions because of steric hindrance.Benzylic and allylic halides readily undergo reactions because they form
relatively stable carbocations. While primary alkyl halides (such as and
) cannot undergo reactions because their carbocations are too
unstable,primary benzylic and primary allylic halides readily undergo reactions

because their carbocations are stabilized by electron delocalization (Section7.7).
If the resonance contributors of the allylic carbocation intermediate have different
groups bonded to their carbons,two substitution products will be obtained.
Vinylic halides and aryl halides do not undergo or reactions. They do not
undergo reactions because,as the nucleophile approaches the back side of the 

carbon,it is repelled by the electron cloud of the double bond or the aromatic ring.
a vinylic halidean aryl halide
nucleophileCC 
ClHHRBrnucleophilea nucleophile is repelledby the  electron cloudpsp2SN2SN1SN2sp2SN1SN1CH3CH2CH2BrCH3CH2BrSN1benzyl chloride1-bromo-2-butenean allylic halide2-buten-1-olbenzyl methyl etherCH2ClCH
3OCH3CHCHCH
2BrHO
CH3CHCHCH
2OHBr
CH2OCH3ClSN2 conditionsSN2 conditionsSN2SN2CH3OHSN1CH2ClCH
2ClCH2OCH3HSN1CH2CH2CHBrH2OCHCH2OHCH2HCHCH2BrCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CHCHCH
2BrCH
3CHCHCH
2CH3CHCHCH
2CH3CHCHCH
2CH3CHCHCH
2OHHBrH2OHOHH2OSN1Benzylic and allylic halides undergo and reactions.
SN2SN1Vinylic and aryl halides undergo 
neither nor reactions.
SN2SN13-D Molecule:Benzyl cation3-D Molecule:Allyl cationBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 383
384CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesThere are two reasons that vinylic halides and aryl halides do not undergo reac-
tions. First,vinylic and aryl cations are even more unstable than primary carbocations

(Section10.5) because the positive charge is on an 
spcarbon. Since spcarbons aremoreelectronegative than the carbons that carry the positive charge of alkyl carboca-

tions,spcarbons are more resistant to becoming positively charged. Second,we have seen
that carbons form stronger bonds than do carbons (Section1.14). As a result,it

isharder to break the carbon
Ðhalogen bond when the halogen is bonded to an carbon.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Which alkyl halide would you expect to be more reactive in an solvolysis reaction?
When asked to determine the relative reactivities of two compounds,we need to compare
the values of their rate-determining steps. The faster reacting compound will be the

one with the smallest difference between its free energy and the free energy of its rate-

determining transition state; that is,the faster reacting compound will have the 
smallervalue. Both alkyl halides have approximately the same stability,so the difference in
their reaction rates will be due to the difference in stability of the transition states of their

rate-determining steps. The rate-determining step is carbocation formation,so the com-

pound that forms the more stable carbocation will be the one that has the faster rate of

solvolysis. The compound on the left forms the more stable carbocation; it has three reso-

nance contributors,whereas the other carbocation has only two resonance contributors.
Now continue on to Problems 21
Ð23.PROBLEM 21Which alkyl halide would you expect to be more reactive in an solvolysis reaction?
CC 
CH2CH3HorCH3CHCH2HBrCC 
CH3HCH3CH2CHHBrSN1ààCHCH
CH3CH2CH2BrCH2BrOCH3COorSN1vinylic cationtoo unstable to be formedaryl cationtoo unstable to be formedRCHBrBr
CHRCHCHCl
sp hybridizedsp2 hybridizedsp2 hybridizedsp hybridizedClsp2sp3sp2sp2SN1CH3OCHCHCH
2CH3OCHCHCH
2CH2CCH
2OCH3CH2CCH
2OCH3CH3OCHCHCH
2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 384
PROBLEM 22Which alkyl halide would you expect to be more reactive in an reaction with a given
nucleophile? In each case,you can assume that both alkyl halides have the same stability.
a.or
b.or
c.d.e.f.g.PROBLEM 23For each of the pairs in Problem 22,which compound would be more reactive in an 
reaction?PROBLEM 24Show the configuration of the products obtained from the following reaction:
a.under conditions that favor an reaction
b.under conditions that favor an reaction
10.9Competition Between and Reactions
The characteristics of and reactions are summarized in Table10.5. Remem-
ber that the Ò2Óin and the 
Ò1Óin refer to the molecularity
Ñhow many
molecules are involved in the rate-determining step. Thus,the rate-determining step of

an reaction is bimolecular,whereas the rate-determining step of an reaction is
SN1SN2ÒSN1ÓÒSN2ÓSN1SN2SN1SN2CH3OHCH3OCHCH2BrCH3CHSN1SN2SN1CH3CHCCH
3orBrCH3CHCHCHCH
3BrCH2Bror
BrCH2CH2BrorCH2CHCH3BrCH3CH2CH2CHBrCH3CH3CH2CHCH2BrCH3orCH3CH2CHBror
CH3CH3CH2CHBrCH2CH3CH3OCH2ClCH3CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2ICH3CH2CH2BrSN2Section 10.9Competition Between and Reactions
385SN1SN2Table 10.5Comparison of and Reactions
SN1SN2A one-step mechanismA stepwise mechanism that forms a carbocation
intermediateA bimolecular rate-determiningA unimolecular rate-determining
stepstep
No carbocation rearrangementsCarbocation rearrangements

Product has inverted configurationProducts have both retained and inverted
relative to the reactantconfigurations relative to the reactant
Reactivity order:Reactivity order:
methyl3¡2¡1¡methyl1¡2¡3¡SN1SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 385
386CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesTable 10.6Summary of the Reactivity of Alkyl Halides in Nucleophilic 
Substitution ReactionsMethyl and 1¡alkyl halidesonly
Vinylic and aryl halidesNeither nor 

2¡alkyl halidesand 
1¡and 2¡benzylic and 1¡and 2¡allylic halidesand 
3¡alkyl halidesonly
3¡benzylic and 3¡allylic halidesonly
SN1SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2When an alkyl halide can undergo both an reaction 
andan reaction,both
reactions take place simultaneously. The conditions under which the reaction is carried

out determine which of the reactions predominates. Therefore,we have some experi-

mental control over which reaction takes place.
When an alkyl halide can undergo substitution by both mechanisms,what condi-
tions favor an reaction? What conditions favor an reaction? These are

important questions to synthetic chemists because an reaction forms a single sub-

stitution product,whereas an reaction can form two substitution products if the

leaving group is bonded to an asymmetric carbon. An reaction is further compli-

cated by carbocation rearrangements. In other words,an reaction is a synthetic

chemistÕs friend,but an reaction can be a synthetic chemist
Õs nightmare.When the structure
of the alkyl halide allows it to undergo both and reactions,
three conditions determine which reaction will predominate:(1)the 
concentration
of thenucleophile,(2)the 
reactivity
of the nucleophile,and (3)the 
solventin which the reactionis carried out. To understand how the concentration and the reactivity of the nucleophile

affect whether an or an reaction predominates,we must examine the rate laws

for the two reactions. The rate constants have been given subscripts that indicate the 

reaction order.
The rate law for the reaction of an alkyl halide that can undergo both and re-
actions simultaneously is the sum of the individual rate laws.
From the rate law,you can see that increasing the 
concentration
of the nucleophileincreases the rate of an reaction but has no effect on the rate of an reaction.
SN1SN2contribution to the rateby an SN2 reactionrate=+k2[alkyl halide][nucleophile]k1[alkyl halide]contribution to the rateby an SN1 reactionSN1SN2Rate law for an S
N2 reaction = 
k2 [alkyl halide] [nucleophile]
Rate law for S
N1 reaction = 
k1 [alkyl halide]
SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN1SN2SN2SN1SN2SN1unimolecular. These numbers do not refer to the number of steps in the mechanism. In
fact,just the opposite is true:An reaction proceeds by a 
one-step concerted mech-anism,and an reaction proceeds by a 
two-step mechanism with a carbocationintermediate.We have seen that methyl halides and primary alkyl halides undergo only reac-
tions because methyl cations and primary carbocations,which would be formed in an
reaction,are too unstable to be formed in an reaction. Tertiary alkyl halides
undergo only reactions because steric hindrance makes them unreactive in an 

reaction. Secondary alkyl halides as well as benzylic and allylic halides (unless they

are tertiary) can undergo both and reactions because they form relatively

stable carbocations and the steric hindrance associated with these alkyl halides is

generally not very great. Vinylic and aryl halides do not undergo either or 

reactions. These results are summarized in Table10.6.
SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 386
Section 10.9Competition Between and Reactions
387SN1SN2Therefore,when both reactions occur simultaneously,increasing the concentration of
the nucleophile increases the fraction of the reaction that takes place by an path-

way. In contrast,decreasing the concentration of the nucleophile decreases the fraction

of the reaction that takes place by an pathway.
The slow (and only) step of anreaction is attack of the nucleophile on the alkyl
halide. Increasing the reactivity
of the nucleophile increases the rate of an reac-
tion by increasing the value of the rate constant because more reactive nucle-

ophiles are better able to displace the leaving group. The slow step of an reaction

is the dissociation of the alkyl halide. The carbocation formed in the slow step reacts

rapidly in a second step with any nucleophile present in the reaction mixture. Increas-

ing the rate of the fast step does not affect the rate of the prior slow,carbocation-form-

ing step. This means that increasing the reactivity of the nucleophile has no effect on

the rate of an reaction. A good nucleophile,therefore,favors an reaction over

an reaction. A poor nucleophile favors an reaction,not by increasing the rate

of the reaction itself,but by decreasing the rate of the competing reaction. In

summary:¥An reaction is favored by a high concentration of a good nucleophile.
¥An reaction is favored by a low concentration of a nucleophile or by a poor
nucleophile.Look back at the reactions in previous sections and notice that they all use poor
nucleophiles whereas the reactions use good nucleophiles
In other words,a poor nucleophile is used to encourage an reac-
tion,and a good nucleophile is used to encourage an reaction. In Section10.10,

we will look at the third factor that influences whether an or an reaction will

predominateÑthe solvent in which the reaction is carried out.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
This problem will give you practice determining whether a substitution reaction will take
place by an or an pathway. (Keep in mind that good nucleophiles encourage 

reactions,whereas poor nucleophiles encourage reactions.)
Give the configuration(s) of the substitution product(s) that will be obtained from the reac-
tions of the following secondary alkyl halides with the indicated nucleophile:
a.Because a high concentration of a good nucleophile is used,we can predict that the
reaction is an reaction. Therefore,the product will have the inverted configuration

relative to the configuration of the reactant. (An easy way to draw the inverted product

is to draw the mirror image of the reacting alkyl halide and then put the nucleophile in

the same location as the leaving group.)
b.Because a poor nucleophile is used,we can predict that the reaction is an reaction.
Therefore,we will obtain two substitution products,one with the retained configuration

and one with the inverted configuration,relative to the configuration of the reactant.
c.The relatively poor nucleophile suggests that the reaction is an reaction. However,
the product does not have an asymmetric carbon,so it does not have stereoisomers.
SN1NH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3ICH3CH2CHCH2CH3NH2SN1CH3OHCCH3CH2CH3CH3BrOCH3HCCH2CH3CH3HHCH3OCCH2CH3SN2high concentrationCH3OCCH3CH2CH3CH3HBrCH3OHCCH2CH3SN1SN2SN2SN1SN1SN2SN2SN1(HO, CH3O).SN2(H2O, CH3OH),SN1SN1SN2SN2SN1SN1SN1SN2SN1SN12,SN2SN2SN2SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 387
(The same substitution product would have been obtained if the reaction had been an
reaction.)d.Because a high concentration of a good nucleophile is employed,we can predict that
the reaction is an reaction. Therefore,the product will have the inverted configura-

tion relative to the configuration of the reactant. But since the configuration of the reac-

tant is not indicated,we do not know the configuration of the product.
e.Because a poor nucleophile is employed,we can predict that the reaction is an re-
action. Therefore,both stereoisomers will be formed,regardless of the configuration of

the reactant.Now continue on to Problem 25.
PROBLEM 25Give the configuration(s) of the substitution product(s) that will be obtained from the reac-
tions of the following secondary alkyl halides with the indicated nucleophile:
a.b.c.d.e.f.PROBLEM 26SOLVED
The rate law for the substitution reaction of 2-bromobutane and in 75% ethanol and
25% water at 30
¡C israte3.20105[2-bromobutane][HO]1.5106[2-bromobutane]HOCH3HCCH2CH3CH3OHBrCH3BrHCCH2CH3high concentrationCH3OCH3OHCH3ClHHhigh concentrationCH3OCH3ClHHNH3CCH2CH2CH3CH3HClhigh concentrationCH3CH2CH2OCCH2CH3CH3HBrSN1H2OCH3CH2CHCH3ICH3OHHCCH2CH3CH3HHOCCH2CH3SN2high concentrationHOCH3CH2CHCH3ClCH3CH2CHCH3OHSN2388CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 388
Section 10.10The Role of the Solvent in and Reactions
389SN1SN2What percentage of the reaction takes place by the mechanism when these conditions
are met?a.b.
SOLUTION TO 26a10.10The Role of the Solvent in and ReactionsThe solvent in which a nucleophilic substitution reaction is carried out also influences
whether an or an reaction will predominate. Before we can understand how a

particular solvent favors one reaction over another,however,we must understand how

solvents stabilize organic molecules.
The dielectric constantof a solvent is a measure of how well the solvent can insu-
late opposite charges from one another. Solvent molecules insulate charges by cluster-

ing around a charge,so that the positive poles of the solvent molecules surround

negative charges while the negative poles of the solvent molecules surround positive

charges. Recall that the interaction between a solvent and an ion or a molecule dis-

solved in that solvent is called 
solvation(Section2.9). When an ion interacts with a
polar solvent,the charge is no longer localized solely on the ion,but is spread out to the

surrounding solvent molecules. Spreading out the charge stabilizes the charged species.
Polar solvents have high dielectric constants and thus are very good at insulating
(solvating) charges. Nonpolar solvents have low dielectric constants and are poor

insulators. The dielectric constants of some common solvents are listed in Table10.7.

In this table,solvents are divided into two groups:protic solvents and aprotic

solvents. Recall that 
protic solvents
contain a hydrogen bonded to an oxygen or a
nitrogen,so protic solvents are hydrogen bond donors. 
Aprotic solvents
,on the other
hand,do not have a hydrogen bonded to an oxygen or a nitrogen,so they are 
nothydrogen bond donors.HHOYYHHOHHHHHHOOOHHOHHOionÐdipole interactionsbetween a negatively
charged species and waterionÐdipole interactionsbetween a positively
charged species and waterHHOSN1SN2SN1SN2 96% 3.201053.201050.151051003.201053.35105100 3.20105[2-bromobutane]1001003.20105[2-bromobutane]1001.5106[2-bromobutane]percentage by SN2SN2SN2SN1100[HO]0.001 M[HO]1.00 MSN2AU:OK as
changed?BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 389
390CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesSOLVATION EFFECTS
The tremendous amount of energy that is provid-
ed by solvation can be appreciated by considering
the energy required to break the crystal lattice of sodium chlo-

ride (table salt) (Figure1.1). In the absence of a solvent,sodium
chloride must be heated to more than 800
¡C to overcome the
forces that hold the oppositely charged ions together. However,

sodium chloride readily dissolves in water at room temperature

because solvation of the and ions by water provides

the energy necessary to separate the ions.
ClNaStabilization of charges by solvent interaction plays an important role in organic re-
actions. For example,when an alkyl halide undergoes an reaction,the first step is

dissociation of the carbonÐhalogen bond to form a carbocation and a halide ion. Ener-
gy is required to break the bond,but with no bonds being formed,where does the en-

ergy come from? If the reaction is carried out in a polar solvent,the ions that are

produced are solvated. The energy associated with a single ion
Ðdipole interaction issmall,but the additive effect of all the ion
Ðdipole interactions involved in stabilizing a
charged species by the solvent represents a great deal of energy. These ion
Ðdipole in-teractions provide much of the energy necessary for dissociation of the carbon
Ðhalo-gen bond. So in an reaction,the alkyl halide does not fall apart spontaneously,but

rather,polar solvent molecules pull it apart. An reaction,therefore,cannot take

place in a nonpolar solvent. It also cannot take place in the gas phase,where there are

no solvent molecules and,consequently,no solvation effects.
SN1SN1SN1Table 10.7   The Dielectric Constants of Some Common Solvents
SolventStructureDielectric constant
Abbreviation
(, at 25C)Boiling point(C)WaterH
2O79
Formic acidHCOOH59
MethanolCH
3OH33
EthanolCH
3CH2OH25
tert-Butyl alcohol(CH
3)3COH11
Acetic acidCH
3COOH6
Dimethyl sulfoxide(CH
3)2SO47
AcetonitrileCH
3CN38
Dimethylformamide(CH
3)2NCHO37
Hexamethylphosphoric acid triamide[(CH
3)2N]3PO 30Acetone(CH
3)2CO21
EthDichloromethaneTetrahydrofuran
yl acetateCH
CH2Cl23COOCH2CH36
9.1Diethyl etherCH
3CH2OCH2CH34.3Benzene2.3
HexaneCH
3(CH2)4CH31.9100100.664.7
78.3
82.3117.918981.6153
23356.377.1407.666
34.680.168.7ÑÑMeOHEtOH
tert-BuOHHOAc
DMSOMeCN
DMF
HMPA
Me2COTHFEtOAc
ÑEt2OOÑÑProtic solvents
Aprotic solvents
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 390
Section 10.10The Role of the Solvent in and Reactions
391SN1SN2Free energyProgress of the reactionreactants are more highly chargedtransition state is less highly chargedGàGànonpolarsolventpolarsolventGàGànonpolarsolventpolarsolventFigure 10.7
Reaction coordinate diagram for a reaction in which thecharge on the reactants is greater than the charge on the
transition state.GàGànonpolarsolventpolarsolventGàGàreactants are less highly chargedtransition state is more highly chargednonpolarsolventpolarsolventFree energyProgress of the reactionFigure 10.8
Reaction coordinate diagram for a reaction in which thecharge on the transition state is greater than the charge
on the reactants.Increasing the polarity of the solvent
will decrease the rate of the reaction if

one or more reactants in the rate-

determining step are charged.
Increasing the polarity of the solvent
will increase the rate of the reaction if

none of the reactants in the rate-

determining step is charged.The Effect of the Solvent on the Rate of a Reaction
One simple rule describes how a change in solvent will affect the rate of most chemi-
cal reactions:Increasing the polarity of the solvent will decrease the rate of the reac-
tion if one or more reactants in the rate-determining step are charged and will

increase the rate of the reaction if none of the reactants in the rate-determining step is

charged.
Now let
Õs see why this rule is true. The rate of a reaction depends on the difference
between the free energy of the reactants and the free energy of the transition state in

the rate-determining step of the reaction. We can,therefore,predict how changing the

polarity of the solvent will affect the rate of a reaction simply by looking at the charge

on the reactant(s) and the charge on the transition state of the rate-determining step,to

determine which of these species will be more stabilized by a polar solvent. The

greater the charge on the solvated molecule,the stronger the interaction with a polar

solvent and the more the charge will be stabilized.
Therefore,if the charge on the reactants is greater than the charge on the rate-deter-
mining transition state,a polar solvent will stabilize the reactants more than it will sta-

bilize the transition state,increasing the difference in energy between them.

Consequently,
increasing the polarity of the solvent will decrease the rate of the reac-
tion,as shown in Figure10.7.
On the other hand,if the charge on the rate-determining transition state is greater
than the charge on the reactants,a polar solvent will stabilize the transition state more

than it will stabilize the reactants. Therefore,
increasing the polarity of the solvent
willdecrease the difference in energy between them,which 
will increase the rate of
the reaction
,as shown in Figure10.8.
ààThe Effect of the Solvent on the Rate of an Reaction
Now let
Õs see how increasing the polarity of the solvent affects the rate of an re-
action of an alkyl halide. The alkyl halide is the only reactant in the rate-determining

step of an reaction. It is a neutral molecule with a small dipole moment. The rate-

determining transition state has a greater charge because as the carbon
Ðhalogen bondbreaks,the carbon becomes more positive and the halogen becomes more negative.

Since the charge on the transition state is greater than the charge on the reactant,
SN1SN1SN1BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 391
392CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesTable 10.8The Effect of the Polarity of the Solvent on the Rate 
of Reaction of tert-Butyl Bromide in an Reaction
SN1SolventRelative rate
100% water1200
80% water / 20% ethanol400

50% water / 50% ethanol60

20% water / 80% ethanol10

100% ethanol1
increasing the polarity of the solvent will increase the rate of the reaction
(Figure10.8and Table10.8).
In Chapter12,we will see that compounds other than alkyl halides undergo re-
actions. As long as the compound undergoing an reaction is neutral,increasing

the polarity of the solvent will 
increase
the rate of the reaction because the polar
solvent will stabilize the dispersed charges on the transition state more than it will sta-

bilize the relatively neutral reactant (Figure10.8). If,however,the compound under-

going an reaction is charged,increasing the polarity of the solvent will 
decrease
the rate of the reaction because the more polar solvent will stabilize the full charge on

the reactant to a greater extent than it will stabilize the dispersed charge on the transi-

tion state (Figure10.7).
SN1SN1SN1SN1àreactanttransition stateproducts
CCC
XXX
rate-determining step of an SN1 reaction
SN1The Effect of the Solvent on the Rate of an Reaction
The way in which a change in the polarity of the solvent affects the rate of an re-
action depends on whether the reactants are charged or neutral,just as in an 

reaction.Most reactions of alkyl halides involve a neutral alkyl halide and a charged nu-
cleophile. Increasing the polarity of a solvent will have a strong stabilizing effect on

the negatively charged nucleophile. The transition state also has a negative charge,but

the charge is dispersed over two atoms. Consequently,the interactions between the

solvent and the transition state are not as strong as the interactions between the solvent

and the fully charged nucleophile. Therefore,a polar solvent stabilizes the nucleophile

more than it stabilizes the transition state,so increasing the polarity of the solvent will

decrease the rate of the reaction (Figure10.7).
If,however,the reaction involves an alkyl halide and a neutral nucleophile,the
charge on the transition state will be larger than the charge on the neutral reactants,so

increasing the polarity of the solvent will increase the rate of the substitution reaction

(Figure10.8).
In summary,the way in which a change in solvent affects the rate of a substitution
reaction does not depend on the mechanism of the reaction. It depends onlyonwhether the reactants are charged:
If a reactant in the rate-determining step is
charged,increasing the polarity of the solvent will decrease the rate of the reaction. If

none of the reactants in the rate-determining step is charged,increasing the polarity of

the solvent will increase the rate of the reaction.
In considering the solvation of charged species by a polar solvent,the polar sol-
vents we considered were hydrogen bond donors (protic polar solvents) such as water

and alcohols. Some polar solvents
Ñfor example,
N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),di-
methyl sulfoxide (DMSO),and hexamethylphosphoric acid triamide (HMPA)
Ñarenot hydrogen bond donors (they are aprotic polar solvents) (Table10.7).
SN2SN2SN1SN2SN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 392
PROBLEM 27How will the rate of each of the following reactions change if the polarity of a protic
polar solvent is increased?
PROBLEM 28Which reaction in each of the following pairs will take place more rapidly?
DMSOHOCH3BrBrCH3OHEtOHHOCH3BrBrCH3OHNH3CH3BrBrCH3OHH2OCH3BrBrCH3OHHOCH3IICH3OHHOCH3ClClCH3OHHOCH3BrBrCH3OHH2OCH3BrHBrCH3OHa.b.c.d.CH3CH3OCH3SCH3CH3SCH3CH3OCH3NH3CH3CH3ICH3CH2NH3IHOCH3CH2CH2CH2Br BrCH3CH2CH2CH2OHa.b.c.SN2Section 10.10The Role of the Solvent in and Reactions
393SN1SN2ENVIRONMENTAL ADAPTATION
The microorganism 
Xanthobacterhas learned touse the alkyl halides that reach the ground as in-
dustrial pollutants as a source of carbon. The microorganism

synthesizes an enzyme that uses the alkyl halide as a starting

material to produce other carbon-containing compounds that it
needs. This enzyme has a several nonpolar groups at its active
siteÑa pocket in the enzyme where the reaction it catalyzes
takes place. The first step of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction is

an reaction. Because the nucleophile is charged,the

reaction will be faster in a nonpolar solvent. The nonpolar

groups on the surface of the enzyme provide this nonpolar

environment.
SN2An reaction of an alkyl halide is
favored by a high concentration of a

good nucleophile in an aprotic polar

solvent.SN2An reaction of an alkyl halide is
favored by a low concentration of a

poor nucleophile in a protic polar

solvent.SN1Ideally,one would like to carry out an reaction with a negatively charged
nucleophile in a nonpolar solvent because the localized negative charge on the reactant is

greater than the dispersed negative charge on the transition state. However,a negatively

charged nucleophile generally will not dissolve in a nonpolar solvent,so an aprotic polar

solvent is used. Because aprotic polar solvents are not hydrogen bond donors,they are

less effective than polar protic solvents in solvating negative charges; indeed,we have

seen that they solvate negative charges particularly poorly (Section10.3). Thus,the rate

of an reaction involving a negatively charged nucleophile will be greater in an apro-

tic polar solvent than in a protic polar solvent. Consequently,an aprotic polar solvent is

the solvent of choice for an reaction in which the nucleophile is negatively charged,

whereas a protic polar solvent is used if the nucleophile is a neutral molecule.
We have now seen that when an alkyl halide can undergo bothand
reactions,thereaction will be favored by a high concentration of a good (nega-

tively charged) nucleophile in an aprotic polar solvent,whereas thereaction will

be favored by a poor (neutral) nucleophile in a protic polar solvent.
1212SN2SN2SN2Tutorial:
Common terms in and 

reactionsSN2SN1Tutorial:
promoting factorsSN2BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 393
PROBLEM 29SOLVED
Most of the values given throughout this text are values determined in water. How
would the values of the following classes of compounds change if they were deter-

mined in a solvent less polar than water:carboxylic acids,alcohols,phenols,ammonium

ions and anilinium ions 
SOLUTIONA is the negative logarithm of an equilibrium constant,
(Section1.17). Because we are determining how changing the polarity of a solvent affects

an equilibrium constant,we must look at how changing the polarity of the solvent affects

the stability of the reactants and products.Carboxylic acids,alcohols,and phenols are neutral in their acidic forms (HB) and
charged in their basic forms A polar protic solvent will stabilize and more

than it will stabilize HB,thereby increasing Therefore,will be larger in water than

in a less polar solvent,which means that the value will be lower in water. So the 

values of carboxylic acids,alcohols,and phenols determined in a less polar solvent than

water will be higher than those determined in water.
Ammonium ions and anilinium ions are charged in their acidic forms and neutral
in their basic forms (B). A polar solvent will stabilize and more than it will stabi-

lize B. Because is stabilized slightly more than will decrease,which means

that the value will be higher in water than in a less polar solvent. So the values of

ammonium ions and anilinium ions determined in a less polar solvent than water will be

slightly lower than those determined in water.
PROBLEM 30Would you expect acetate ion to be a more reactive nucleophile in an re-

action carried out in methanol or in dimethyl sulfoxide?PROBLEM 31Under which of the following reaction conditions would (
R)-2-chlorobutane form the most
(R)-2-butanol:in 50% water and 50% ethanol or in 100% ethanol?
10.11Biological Methylating ReagentsIf an organic chemist wanted to put a methyl group on a nucleophile,methyl iodide
would most likely be the methylating agent used. Of the methyl halides,methyl iodide

has the most easily displaced leaving group because is the weakest base of the

halide ions. In addition,methyl iodide is a liquid,so it is easier to handle than methyl

bromide or methyl chloride. The reaction would be a simple reaction.
In a living cell,however,methyl iodide is not available. It is only slightly solu-
ble in water,so is not found in the predominantly aqueous environments of biologi-

cal systems. Instead,biological systems use 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) andas methylating agents,both of which are soluble in water.
Although they look much more complicated than methyl iodide,they perform the

same functionÑthe transfer of a methyl group to a nucleophile. Notice that the methyl
5-methyltetrahydrofolateCH3IICH3NuNuSN2IHOHOSN2(CH3CO2  )papaH, aHBHHB(HB)papaaa.HB(B).Ka[B] [H][HB][B] [H][HB]Kaa neutral acida positively charged acidapa(C6H5NH3  )?(RNH3  ),papaEt2Oe.NH3CH3BrBrCH3NH3EtOHNH3CH3BrBrCH3NH3394CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 394
Section 10.11Biological Methylating Reagents
395group in each of these methylating agents is attached to a positively charged atom.
This means that the methyl groups are attached to very good leaving groups,so bio-

logical methylation can take place at a reasonable rate.
Biological systems use SAM to convert norepinephrine (noradrenaline) into epi-
nephrine (adrenaline). The reaction is a simple methylation reaction. Norepinephrine

and epinephrine are hormones that are released into the bloodstream in response to
stress. Epinephrine is the more potent hormone of the two.
The conversion of phosphatidylethanolamine,a component of cell membranes,into
phosphatidylcholine requires three methylations by three equivalents of SAM.

(Biological cell membranes will be discussed in Section26.4; the use of
as a biological methylating agent is discussed in moredetail in Section25.8.)
5-methyltetrahydrofolatenorepinephrinenoradrenalineepinephrineadrenalineNH2NNONNHOOHHOCHCH
2NH2O2CCHCH2CH2SCH
2CH3NH3HOOHHOCHCH
2NHCH3HHOHHHHOHNH2NNONNO2CCHCH2CH2SCH
2NH3HOHHHHOHN5-methyltetrahydrofolatetetrahydrofolateNuNuCH
3H2NHNONNHCH
3CH2NHRNHH2NHNONNHCH2NHRNHNH2NNONNO2CCHCH2CH2SNuCH
2CH3NH3HOHHHHOHNH2NNONNO2CCHCH2CH2SCH
2NuCH3NH3HOHHHHOHS-adenosylmethionineSAMS-adenosylhomocysteineSAHRCOOO3 SAM
OOCH2OCRCH2OPOCH2CH2NH2CHRCOOOOCH3OCH2CH3OCRCH2OPOCH2CH2NCH3CHphosphatidylcholinephosphatidylethanolamine3 SAHBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 395
396CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl HalidesS-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE: A NATURAL ANTIDEPRESSANT
S-Adenosylmethionine is sold in many health
food and drug stores as a treatment for depression and arthritis.
It is marketed under the name SAMe (pronounced Sammy). Al-

though SAMe has been used clinically in Europe for more than
two decades,it has not been rigorously evaluated in the United

States and is not approved by the FDA. It can be sold,however,
because the FDA does not prohibit the sale of most naturally
occurring substances,as long as the marketer does not make

therapeutic claims. SAMe has also been found to be effective in

the treatment of liver diseases
Ñdiseases caused by alcohol andthe hepatitis C virus. The attenuation of liver injuries is accom-

panied by increased levels of glutathione in the liver. Glu-

tathione is an important antioxidant (Section23.8). SAM is

required for the synthesis of cysteine (an amino acid),which,in

turn,is required for the synthesis of glutathione.
SummaryAlkyl halides undergo two kinds of 
nucleophilic substitu-tion reactions
:and In both reactions,a nucle-
ophile substitutes for a halogen,which is called a 
leaving
group
. An reaction is bimolecular
Ñtwo
molecules areinvolved in the rate-limiting step; an reaction is unimol-

ecularÑonemolecule is involved in the rate-limiting step.
The rate of an reaction
depends on the concentrationof both the alkyl halide and the nucleophile. An reaction

is a one-step reaction:The nucleophile attacks the back side

of the carbon that is attached to the halogen. The reaction

proceeds in the direction that allows the stronger base to dis-

place the weaker base; it is reversible only if the difference

between the basicities of the nucleophile and the leaving

group is small. The rate of an reaction depends on steric

hindrance:The bulkier the groups at the back side of the car-

bon undergoing attack,the slower is the reaction. Tertiary

carbocations,therefore,cannot undergo reactions. An
reaction takes place with 
inversion of configuration
.The rate of an reaction
depends only on the concen-
tration of the alkyl halide. The halogen departs in the first

step,forming a carbocation that is attacked by a nucleophile

in the second step. Therefore,carbocation rearrangements

can occur. The rate of an reaction depends on the ease

of carbocation formation. Tertiary alkyl halides,therefore,

are more reactive than secondary alkyl halides since tertiary

carbocations are more stable than secondary carbocations.

Primary carbocations are so unstable that primary alkyl

halides cannot undergo reactions. An reaction

takes place with racemization. Most reactions are

solvolysis
reactions:The solvent is the nucleophile.
The rates of both and reactions are influenced
by the nature of the leaving group. Weak bases are the best

leaving groups because weak bases are best able to accom-
SN1SN2SN1SN1SN1SN1SN1SN2SN2SN2SN2SN2SN1SN2SN1.SN2modate the negative charge. Thus,the weaker the basicity
of the leaving group,the faster the reaction will occur.

Therefore,the relative reactivities of alkyl halides that dif-

fer only in the halogen atom are 

in both and reactions.
Basicityis a measure of how well a compound shares its
lone pair with a proton. Nucleophilicityis a measure ofhow readily a compound is able to attack an electron-defi-

cient atom. In comparing molecules with the same attack-
ing atom or with attacking atoms of the same size,the

stronger base is a better nucleophile. If the attacking atoms
are very different in size,the relationship between basicity

and nucleophilicity depends on the solvent. In protic sol-

vents,stronger bases are poorer nucleophiles because of

ionÐdipole interactionsbetween the ion and the solvent.
Methyl halides and primary alkyl halides undergo only
reactions,tertiary alkyl halides undergo only reac-
tions,vinylic and aryl halides undergo neither nor 

reactions,and secondary alkyl halides and benzylic and al-

lylic halides (unless they are tertiary) undergo both and
reactions. When the structure of the alkyl halide allows
it to undergo both and reactions,the reaction

is favored by a high concentration of a good nucleophile in

an aprotic polar solvent,while the reaction is favored

by a poor nucleophile in a protic polar solvent.
Protic solvents
(ROH) are hydrogen bond donors;
aprotic solvents
(DMF,DMSO) are not hydrogen bond
donors. The dielectric constantof a solvent tells how well
the solvent insulates opposite charges from one another. In-

creasing the polarity of the solvent will decrease the rate of

the reaction if one or more reactants in the rate-determining
step are charged and will increase the rate of the reaction if

none of the reactants in the rate-determining step is charged.
H2O,SN1SN2SN1SN2SN2SN1SN1SN2SN1SN2SN1SN2RIRBrRClRFSummary of Reactions1.reaction:a one-step mechanism
Relative reactivities of alkyl halides:
Only the inverted product is formed.
CH3X1¡2¡3¡.NuCC
XXNuSN2AU:OK two and one bold face?
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 396
Problems3972.reaction:a two-step mechanism with a carbocation intermediate
Relative reactivities of alkyl halides:
Both the inverted and noninverted products are formed.
3¡2¡1¡CH3X.NuCCCXXNuSN1Key Terms
aprotic solvent (p.389)
back-side attack (p.363)

base (p.368)

basicity (p.368)

bimolecular (p.000)

complete racemization (p.381)

dielectric constant (p.389)

elimination reaction (p.360)

first-order reaction (p.376)

intimate ion pair (p.381)
inversion of configuration (p.366)
ionÐdipole interaction (p.369)
kinetics (p.362)

leaving group (p.360)

Le Ch›telierÕs principle (p.373)
nucleophile (p.368)

nucleophilicity (p.368)

nucleophilic substitution reaction (p.362)

partial racemization (p.381)

protic solvent (p.389)
rate constant (p.362)
rate law (p.362)

second-order reaction (p.362)
reaction (p.376)

reaction (p.363)
solvolysis (p.379)

steric effects (p.364)

steric hindrance (p.364)

substitution reaction (p.360)

unimolecular (p.376)
SN2SN1Problems
32.Give the product of the reaction of methyl bromide with each of the following nucleophiles:
a.b.c.d.e.f.
33.a.Indicate how each of the following factors affects an reaction:
b.Indicate how each of the following factors affects an reaction:
1.the structure of the alkyl halide3.the concentration of the nucleophile

2.the reactivity of the nucleophile4.the solvent
34.Which is a better nucleophile in methanol?
a.or c.or e.or 

b.or d.or f.or 
35.For each of the pairs in Problem 34,indicate which is a better leaving group.

36.What nucleophiles could be used to react with butyl bromide to prepare the following compounds?
BrClHSHONH2NH3BrIH2SH2OHOH2OSN2SN1CH3NH2CH3OHSH2SNH2HOa.b.
c.
d.
e.f.g.h.CH
3CH2CH2CH2CCCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OCCH3OCH3CH2CH2CH2CNCH3CH2CH2CH2NHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2SCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2SHCH3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2OH37.Rank the following compounds in order of 
decreasing
nucleophilicity:a.c.and in methanol
b.d.in methanol
38.The of acetic acid in water is 4.76 (Section1.17). What effect would a decrease in the polarity of the solvent have on the 
Why?pa  ?paBr, Cl, IOOandin DMSONH3H2OCH3CO,CH
3CH2S,CH
3CH2OOin methanolAU:Not 
boldfacein text.Fix there or delete here.
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 397
398CHAPTER 10Substitution Reactions of Alkyl Halides39.For each of the following reactions,give the substitution products; if the products can exist as stereoisomers,show what
stereoisomers are obtained:
a.d.
trans
-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexane
b.(
R)-2-bromopentanee.3-bromo-2-methylpentane
c.f.3-bromo-3-methylpentane
40.Would you expect methoxide ion to be a better nucleophile if it were dissolved in or if it were dissolved in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO)? Why?
41.Which reaction in each of the following pairs will take place more rapidly?
a.c.
b.d.
42.Which of the following compounds would you expect to be more reactive in an reaction?
43.In Section10.11,we saw that 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) methylates the nitrogen atom of noradrenaline to form adrenaline,a
more potent hormone. If SAM methylates an OH group on the benzene ring instead,it completely destroys noradrenaline
Õs activity.
Give the mechanism for the methylation of the OH group by SAM.
44.For each of the following reactions,give the substitution products; if the products can exist as stereoisomers,show what
stereoisomers are obtained:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.3-chloro-2,2-dimethylpentane

f.benzyl bromide
45.Give the substitution products obtained when each of the following compounds is added to a solution of sodium acetate in
acetic acid.
a.2-chloro-2-methyl-3-hexene

b.3-bromo-1-methylcyclohexene
46.The rate of reaction of methyl iodide with quinuclidine was measured in nitrobenzene,and then the rate of reaction of methyl
iodide with triethylamine was measured in the same solvent.

a.Which reaction had the larger rate constant?

b.The same experiment was done using isopropyl iodide instead of methyl iodide. Which reaction had the larger rate constant?

c.Which alkyl halide,has the larger ratio?
quinuclidinetriethylamine
CH2CH3CH3CH2NCH2CH3NtriethylaminequinuclidineCH3CH2OHCH3CH2OH(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3Onorepinephrinea biologically inactive compoundCHCH2NH2SAMHOHOOHCHCH2NH2SAHHOCH3OOHHCH3HCH3BrHor
HCH3HCH3HBrSN2H2O(CH3)3CBr(CH
3)3COHCH3CH2OH(CH3)3CBr(CH
3)3COCH2CH3HBrHBrHOOOClClOHHOClClOHH2OClH2OClHClOHHClOHCH3SClSCl(CH3)2CHSClSClCH3OHCH3OHtrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexanehigh concentration of CH3OCH3OHCH3OHCH3OH()-2-bromopentanehigh concentration of CH3OBRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 398
Problems39947.Only one bromoether (ignoring stereoisomers) is obtained from the reaction of the following alkyl dihalide with methanol:
Give the structure of the ether.
48.Starting with cyclohexane,how could the following compounds be prepared?
a.cyclohexyl bromideb.methoxycyclohexanec.cyclohexanol
49.For each of the following reactions,give the substitution products,assuming that all the reactions are carried out under 
conditions; if the products can exist as stereoisomers,show what stereoisomers are formed:

a.c.

b.d.
50.Explain why tetrahydrofuran can solvate a positively charged species better than diethyl ether can.
51.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.
52.Which of the following will react faster in an reaction?
53.Alkyl halides have been used as insecticides since the discovery of DDT in 1939. DDT was the first compound to be found that
had a high toxicity to insects and a relatively low toxicity to mammals. In 1972,DDT was banned in the United States because it
 isa long-lasting compound and its widespread use caused accumulation in substantial concentrations in wildlife. Chlordane is an
alkyl halide insecticide that is used to protect wooden buildings from termites. Chlordane can be synthesized from two reactant
s ina one-step reaction. One of the reactants is hexachlorocyclopentadiene. What is the other reactant? (
Hint:See Section8.9.)
54.Explain why the following alkyl halide does not undergo a substitution reaction,regardless of the conditions under which the
reaction is run:ClClClClClHClClClClChlordane(CH3)3Cor(CH3)3CHHBrHHBrSN1H2OOHHCH3HCH3CH3OHCH3H3CCHCH
3BrH2OCHBr
CH3OHCH3tetrahydrofuranOdiethyl etherCH3CH2OCH2CH3(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3OSN2BrBrAU:OK as changed?
BRUI10-359_399r2  18-02-2003  2:50 PM  Page 399
In additionto undergoing the
nucleophilic substitution reac-
tions described in Chapter10,
alkyl halides undergo 
eliminationreactions. In an 
elimination reac-
tion,groups are eliminated from a
reactant. For example,when an

alkyl halide undergoes an elimina-

tion reaction,the halogen (X) is re-

moved from one carbon and a proton

is removed from an adjacent carbon.

A double bond is formed between the

two carbons from which the atoms are eliminated. Therefore,
the product of an elimi-
nation reaction is an alkene
.In this chapter,we will first look at the elimination reactions of alkyl halides.
Then we will examine the factors that determine whether an alkyl halide will under-

go a substitution reaction,an elimination reaction,or both a substitution and an

elimination reaction.CH3CH2CH2XCH3CH2CH2YsubstitutioneliminationCH3CHCH
2HYXXYnew doublebond40011CH3CH2CHCH2CH3CH3OClCCH3CCH2CH3HHCCH3CCH2CH3HHElimination Reactions ofAlkyl Halides ¥
Competition Between
Substitution and EliminationBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 400
11.1The E2 ReactionJust as there are two important nucleophilic substitution reactionsÑand
are two important elimination reactions:E1 and E2. The reaction of 
tert-butyl
bromide with hydroxide ion is an example of an 
E2 reaction
; ÒEÓstands for 
eliminationand Ò2Óstands for 
bimolecular. The product of an elimination reaction is an alkene.
The rate of an E2 reaction depends on the concentrations of both 
tert-butyl bromide
and hydroxide ion. It is,therefore,a second-order reaction (Section10.2).
The rate law tells us that both 
tert-butyl bromide and hydroxide ion are involved in
the rate-determining step of the reaction. The following mechanism agrees with the

observed second-order kinetics:
We see that an E2 reaction is a concerted,one-step reaction:The proton and the
bromide ion are removed in the same step,so no intermediate is formed.
mechanism of the E2 reactionCH2CCH
2CH2OBrHOHBrBrÐ is eliminateda proton isremovedCH3CH3CH3CH3rate  k[alkyl halide][base]2-methylpropeneHOCH2CH2OBrCCH3CH3BrCH3CH3CH3tert-butyl bromideSN2ÑthereSN1Section 11.1The E2 Reaction
401INVESTIGATING NATURALLY
OCCURRING ORGANOHALIDESOrganohalides isolated from marine organisms
have been found to have interesting and potent biological ac-

tivity. Compounds produced in nature are called 
natural
products
. Bengamide Ais a natural product that comes from
an orange encrusting sponge. This compound,as well as a

host of analogs,has unique antitumor properties that are cur-

rently being exploited in the development of new anticancer
jasplankinolideCH3ONHONHNOOOOHBrHNcyclocinamide AOONHNHNHNH2HNHOHNHNOOOONClBrHNdrugs. Jaspamide
,also found in a sponge,modulates the for-
mation and depolymerization of actin microtubules. Micro-

tubules are found in all cells and are used for motile events,

such as transportation of vesicles,migration,and cell divi-

sion. Jaspamide is being used to further our understanding of
these processes. Notice that each of these naturally occurring
compounds has six asymmetric carbons.BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 401
402CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationIn an E2 reaction of an alkyl halide,a base removes a proton from a carbon that is
adjacent to the carbon bonded to the halogen. As the proton is removed,the electrons

that the hydrogen shared with carbon move toward the carbon bonded to the halogen.

As these electrons move toward the carbon,the halogen leaves,taking its bonding

electrons with it. The electrons that were bonded to the hydrogen in the reactant have

formed a bond in the product. Removal of a proton and a halide ion is called

dehydrohalogenation
.The carbon to which the halogen is attached is called the -carbon. A carbon adja-
cent to the -carbon is called a -carbon. Because the elimination reaction is initiated

by removing a proton from a -carbon,an E2 reaction is sometimes called a
reaction
. It is also called a 1,2-elimination reaction
because theatoms being removed are on adjacent carbons. (is any base.)
In a series of alkyl halides with the same alkyl group,alkyl iodides are the most re-
active and alkyl fluorides the least reactive in E2 reactions because weaker bases are

better leaving groups (Section10.3).
11.2The Regioselectivity of the E2 ReactionAn alkyl halide such as 2-bromopropane has two -carbons from which a proton can
be removed in an E2 reaction. Because the two -carbons are identical,the proton can

be removed with equal ease from either one. The product of this elimination reaction

is propene.In contrast,2-bromobutane has two structurally different -carbons from which a
proton can be removed. So when 2-bromobutane reacts with a base,two elimination

products are formed:2-butene and 1-butene. This E2 reaction is 
regioselective
becausemore of one constitutional isomer is formed than the other.
What is the regioselectivity of an E2 reaction? In other words,what are the factors
that dictate which of the two elimination products will be formed in greater yield?
bCH3CHCH3CH3OCH3CHCH
2CH3OHBrBr2-bromopropanepropene-carbonsbbrelative reactivities of alkyl halides in an E2 reactionRI      RBr    RCl    RFleast reactivemost reactiveBB-eliminationbbaaRCHCHRRCHCHRBH
BrBHBr-carbon-carbona basepThe weaker the base, the better it is as a leaving group.
CH3CHCH2CH3CH3OCH3OHCH3CHCHCH
3CH2CH3OHCHCH2CH3BrBr2-bromobutane2-butene80%(mixture of E and Z)1-butene20%-carbonsMovie:E2 DehydrohalogenationBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 402
Section 11.2The Regioselectivity of the E2 Reaction
403Progress of the reactionFree energy1-butene 
 CH3OH  BrÐ2-butene 
 CH3OH  BrÐ2-bromobutane 
 CH3OFigure 11.1
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe E2 reaction of 2-bromobutane
and methoxide ion.Toanswer this question,we must determine which of the alkenes is formed more
easilyÑthat is,which is formed faster. The reaction coordinate diagram for the E2
reaction of 2-bromobutane is shown in Figure11.1.
In the transition state leading to an alkene,the and bonds are par-
tially broken and the double bond is partially formed (partially broken and partially

formed bonds are indicated by dashed lines),giving the transition state an alkene-like

structure. Because the transition state has an alkene-like structure,any factors that

stabilize the alkene will also stabilize the transition state leading to its formation,

allowing the alkene to be formed faster. The difference in the rate of formation of the

two alkenes is not very great. Consequently,both products are formed,but the 
more
stableof the two alkenes will be the major product of the reaction.
We know that the stability of an alkene depends on the number of alkyl substituents
bonded to its carbons:The greater the number of substituents,the more stable is

the alkene (Section4.11). Therefore,2-butene,with a total of two methyl substituents

bonded to its carbons,is more stable than 1-butene,with one ethyl substituent.
The reaction of 2-bromo-2-methylbutane with hydroxide ion produces both
2-methyl-2-butene and 2-methyl-1-butene. Because 2-methyl-2-butene is the more

substituted alkene (it has a greater number of alkyl substituents bonded to its car-

bons),it is the more stable of the two alkenes and,therefore,is the major product of

the elimination reaction.Alexander M. Zaitsev,a nineteenth-century Russian chemist,devised a shortcut to
predict the more substituted alkene product. He pointed out 
that the more substituted
alkene product is obtained when a proton is removed from the
-carbonthat is bond-
ed to the fewest hydrogens
. This is called Zaitsev
Õs rule. In 2-chloropentane,for ex-
ample,one -carbon is bonded to three hydrogens and the other -carbon is bonded
bbbsp2sp2sp2CHCH3CH3CHHOCH3Brtransition state leading to 2-buteneOCH3CH2CHCH2CH3HBrtransition state leading to 1-butenemore stableless stable
CBrCHThe major product of an E2 reaction is
the most stable alkene.CH3CCH2CH3HOH2OCH3CCHCH
3CH2H2OCCH2CH3BrBrCH3CH3CH32-bromo-2-methylbutane2-methyl-2-butene70%2-methyl-1-butene30%3-D Molecules:2-Methyl-2-butene; 
2-Methyl-1-buteneBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 403
404CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationAlexander M. Zaitsev (1841Ð1910)
was born in Kazan,Russia. The

German transliteration,Saytzeff,is

sometimes used for his family name.

He received a Ph.D. from the

University of Leipzig in 1866. 

He was a professor of chemistry first

at the University of Kazan and 

later at the University of Kiev.
The most stable alkene is generally (butnot always) the most substituted
alkene.to two hydrogens. According to 
ZaitsevÕs rule
,the more substituted alkene will be
the one formed by removing a proton from the -carbon that is bonded to two hydro-

gens,rather than from the -carbon that is bonded to three hydrogens. Therefore,

2-pentene (a disubstituted alkene) is the major product,and 1-pentene (a monosubsti-

tuted alkene) is the minor product.
Because elimination from a tertiary alkyl halide typically leads to a more substituted
alkene than does elimination from a secondary alkyl halide,and elimination from a sec-

ondary alkyl halide generally leads to a more substituted alkene than does elimination

from a primary alkyl halide,the relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an E2 reaction

are as follows:
Keep in mind that the major product of an E2 reaction is the 
more stable alkene,
andZaitsev
Õs rule is just a shortcut to determine which of the possible alkene products is
the more substituted alkene
. The more substituted alkene is not,however,always the
more stable alkene. In the following reactions,the conjugated alkene is the more sta-

ble alkene even though it is not the most substituted alkene. The major product of each

reaction is,therefore,the conjugated alkene because,being more stable,it is more

easily formed.three alkyl substituentstwo alkyl substituentsone alkyl substituent
RCHCHRRCHCH
2RCHRCH2CRCRRRBrRCH2CHRBrRCH2CH2Brtertiary alkyl halide  >  secondary alkyl halide  >  primary alkyl haliderelative reactivities of alkyl halides in an E2 reactionbbZaitsevÕs rule leads to the most
substituted alkene.CH3CH2CH2CHCH3HOCH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH3Cl2   -hydrogens2-pentene67%(mixture of E and Z)2-chloropentane1-pentene
33%3   -hydrogensdisubstitutedmonosubstitutedCHCH2CHCHCH3HOCH2CHCHCH2H2OCHCH2CHClCHCHCH3CCH3CH2ClCH3CH3CH34-chloro-5-methyl-1-hexene5-methyl-1,3-hexadienea conjugated dienemajor product5-methyl-1,4-hexadienean isolated dieneminor productCH2CHCHCH3Br2-bromo-3-methyl-
1-phenylbutaneCH3CHCHCHCH33-methyl-1-phenyl-1-butenethe double bond is conjugated with the benzene ringmajor product
CH3CH2CHCCH3H2OBr3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-butenethe double bond is not conjugated with the benzene ringminor product
CH3HOTutorial:
E2 Elimination regiochemistryBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 404
CCH3ROCH3BaseMore substitutedproductLess substitutedproductCH3BrCH3CHCH3CH2O79%21%
27%73%
19%81%
8%92%
CCH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2CH3CH32,3-dimethyl-1-butene2,3-dimethyl-2-butene2-bromo-2,3-dimethyl-butaneCH3CHCCH3COCH3CH3CH3COCH3CH2CH3CH3CH2COCH2CH3CH2CH3Table 11.1
Effect of the Steric Properties of the Base on the Distribution of 
Products in an E2 Reaction
Section 11.2The Regioselectivity of the E2 Reaction
405Zaitsev
Õs rule cannot be used to predict the major products of the foregoing reactions
because it does not take into account the fact that conjugated double bonds are more

stable than isolated double bonds (Section8.3). Therefore,if there is a double bond or

a benzene ring in the alkyl halide,do not use Zaitsev
Õs rule to predict the major (moststable) product of an elimination reaction.In some elimination reactions,the 
less stable alkene
is the major product. For ex-
ample,if the base in an E2 reaction is sterically bulky and the approach to the alkyl

halide is sterically hindered,the base will preferentially remove the most accessible

hydrogen. In the following reaction,it is easier for the bulky 
tert-butoxide ion to re-
move one of the more exposed terminal hydrogens,which leads to formation of the

less substituted alkene. Because the less substituted alkene is more easily formed,it is

the major product of the reaction.The data in Table11.1show that when a sterically hindered alkyl halide undergoes an
E2 reaction with a variety of alkoxide ions,the percentage of the less substituted

alkene increases as the size of the base increases.
If the alkyl halide is not sterically hindered and the base is only moderately hin-
dered,the major product will still be the more stable product. For example,the major
approach to the hydrogenis sterically hinderedbulky baseCH3CCH2CH3(CH3)3COHCH3CCHCH
3CH2CH3COHCCH2CH3BrBrCH3CH3CH3CH3CH32-bromo-2-methylbutaneCH3COCH3CH3tert-butoxide ion2-methyl-2-butene28%2-methyl-1-butene72%BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 405
406CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and Eliminationproduct obtained from the reaction of 2-iodobutane and 
tert-butoxide ion is 2-butene.
In other words,it takes a lot of hindrance for the less stable product to be the major

product.PROBLEM 1Which of the alkyl halides is more reactive in an E2 reaction?
PROBLEM 2Draw a reaction coordinate diagram for the E2 reaction of 2-bromo-2,3-dimethylbutane
with sodium tert-butoxide.
Although the major product of an E2 dehydrohalogenation of alkyl chlorides,alkyl
bromides,and alkyl iodides is normally the more substituted alkene,the major product

of the E2 dehydrohalogenation of alkyl fluorides is the less substituted alkene

(Table11.2).
CH3CH2CH2Bror
orCH3CH2CHCH3BrBrCH3CHCH2CHCH3orCH
3CH2CH2CCH3BrCH3CH3CH3CH3CCH2ClorCH
3CCH2CH2ClCH3CH3CH3a.b.c.d.ClBrCH3CHCH2CH3CH3COCH3CHCH
2CHCH2CH3BrCHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3I79%tert-butoxide ion2-iodobutane2-butene21%1-buteneCH3COMore substituted productLess substituted product
CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3OCH3CHCHCH
2CH2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3Leaving groupConjugate acidp
KaIHI
1081%19%
BrHBr
972%28%
ClHCl
767%33%
FHF3.230%70%
XXX
X
X2-hexene(mixture of E and Z)1-hexeneTable 11.2Products Obtained from the E2 Reaction of CH
3OÐand 2-HalohexanesBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 406
Section 11.2The Regioselectivity of the E2 Reaction
4073-D Molecules:Methyl anion; Ethyl 
anion; sec-Propyl anion; tert-Butyl anionCarbocation stability: 3¡is more stable than 1
¡.Carbanion stability: 
1¡is more stable than 3
¡.When a hydrogen and a chlorine,bromine,or iodine are eliminated from an alkyl
halide,the halogen starts to leave as soon as the base begins to remove the proton.

Consquently,a negative charge does not build up on the carbon that is losing the pro-

ton. Thus,the transition state resembles an alkene rather than a carbanion

(Section11.1). The fluoride ion,however,is the strongest base of the halide ions and,

therefore,the poorest leaving group. So when a base begins to remove a proton from

an alkyl fluoride,there is less tendency for the fluoride ion to leave than for the other

halide ions to do so. As a result,negative charge develops on the carbon that is losing

the proton,causing the transition state to resemble a carbanion rather than an alkene.

To determine which of the carbanion-like transition states is more stable,we must de-

termine which carbanion would be more stable.
We have seen that because they are positively charged,carbocations are stabilized
by electron-donating groups. Recall that alkyl groups stabilize carbocations because

alkyl groups are more electron donating than a hydrogen. Thus,tertiary carbocations

are the most stable and methyl cations are the least stable (Section4.2).
Carbanions,on the other hand,are negatively charged,so they are destabilized by
alkyl groups. Therefore,methyl anions are the most stable and tertiary carbanions are

the least stable.The developingnegative charge in the transition state leading to 1-pentene is on a
primary carbon,which is more stable than the transition state leading to 2-pentene,
relative stabilities of carbanionsmost stableleast
stableRRCRtertiarycarbanionRRHsecondarycarbanionHRHprimarycarbanionHHHmethylanionCCCmost 
stableleast
stableRRCRtertiarycarbocationRRCHsecondarycarbocationHRCHprimarycarbocationHHCHmethylcationrelative stabilities of carbocationsCH2CHCH2CH2CH3HOCH3Ftransition state leading to1-pentenemore stableOCH3CH3CHCHCH2CH3HFtransition state leading to2-penteneless stablecarbanion-like
transition stateCH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3OHCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH3OHCHCH2CH3FF2-fluoropentaneCH3Omethoxideion1-pentene70%2-pentene30%(mixture of E and Z)BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 407
in which the developing negative charge is on a secondary carbon. Because the
transition state leading to 1-pentene is more stable,1-pentene is formed more rapidly

and is the major product of the E2 reaction of 2-fluoropentane.The data in Table11.2show that as the halide ion increases in basicity (decreases in
leaving ability),the yield of the more substituted alkene product decreases. However,

the more substituted alkene remains the major elimination product in all cases,except

when the halogen is fluorine.We can summarize by saying that 
the major product of an E2 elimination reaction
is the more stable alkene
except 
if the reactants are sterically hindered or the leaving
group is poor
(e.g.,a fluoride ion),in which case the major product will be the less
stable alkene. In Section11.6,you will see that the more stable product is not always

the major product in the case of certain cyclic compounds.
PROBLEM 3Give the major elimination product obtained from an E2 reaction of each of the following
alkyl halides with hydroxide ion:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 4Which alkyl halide would you expect to be more reactive in an E2 reaction?
a.b.c.d.11.3The E1 ReactionThe second kind of elimination reaction that alkyl halides can undergo is an E1
elimination. The reaction of 
tert-butyl bromide with water to form 2-methyl-
propene is an example of an 
E1 reaction
; ÒEÓstands for elimination and Ò1Óstandsfor unimolecular.
CH2CHCH2CH3BrCH2CH2CHCH3BrorCH3CH2CH2CHCH3orBrCH3CH2CHCH2CH3BrBrBrorCH3CHCHCH2CH3BrCH3CH3CHCH2CHCH3BrCH3orCH3CHCHCH2CH3FCH3CH3CHCHCH2CH3ClCH3BrCH3CHCH2CH3FCH3CHCH2CHCH
2ClCH3CHCH2CH3Cl408CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 408
Section 11.3The E1 Reaction
409Movie:E1 EliminationAn E1 reaction is a first-order elimination reaction because the rate of the reaction
depends only on the concentration of the alkyl halide.
We know,then,that only the alkyl halide is involved in the rate-determining step of the
reaction. Therefore,there must be at least two steps in the reaction.
The foregoingmechanism shows that an E1 reaction has two steps. In the first step,
the alkyl halide dissociates heterolytically,producing a carbocation. In the second

step,the base forms the elimination product by removing a proton from a carbon that

is adjacent to the positively charged carbon (i.e.,from the -carbon). This mecha-

nism agrees with the observed first-order kinetics. The first step of the reaction is the

rate-determining step. Therefore,increasing the concentration of the base
Ñwhichcomes into play only in the second step of the reaction
Ñhas no effect on the rate of
the reaction.We have seen that the of a compound such as ethane that has hydrogens
attached only to hybridized carbons is 50 (Section6.9). How,then,can a weak

base like water remove a proton from an hybridized carbon in the second step

of the reaction? First of all,the is greatly reduced by the postively charged

carbon that can accept the electrons left behind when the proton is removed from an

adjacent carbon. Second,the carbon adjacent to the positively charged carbon

shares the positive charge as a result of hyperconjugation,and this electron-

withdrawing positive charge also increases the acidity of the bond. 

Recall that hyperconjugation
Ñwhere the electrons in the bond adjacent to the
positively charged carbon spread into the empty 
porbitalÑis responsible for 
the greater stability of a tertiary carbocation,compared with a secondary carbo-

cation (Section4.2).
CHHHhyperconjugationthe electron-withdrawing
positive charge 
decreases its pKaCHHsCHpasp3sp3pabrate  k[alkyl halide]CH3OH2OBr
CH3CH3BrCH3tert-butyl bromide2-methylpropeneCH2CCH3CH33-D Molecules:t-Butyl chloride; t-Butyl cationC  H3OCH3CH3CH3BrCH3slowCHH2OCH2CH3CH3CH3CCH2fastmechanism of the E1 reaction Brthe alkyl halidedissociates, forming
a carbocationthe base removes 
a proton from a 
-carbonBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 409
Because the first step is the rate-determining step,the rate of an E1 reaction de-
pends on both the ease with which the carbocation is formed 
andhow readily the leav-
ing group leaves. The more stable the carbocation,the easier it is formed because more

stable carbocations have more stable transition states leading to their formation.

Therefore,the relative reactivities of a series of alkyl halides with the same leaving

group parallel the relative stabilities of the carbocations. A tertiary benzylic halide is

the most reactive alkyl halide because a tertiary benzylic cation
Ñthe most stable
carbocationÑis the easiest to form (Sections7.7and 10.8).
Notice that a tertiary alkyl halide and a weak base were chosen to illustrate the E1 re-
action in this section,whereas a tertiary alkyl halide and a strong base were used to il-

lustrate the E2 reaction in Section11.1. Tertiary alkyl halides are more reactive than
410CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationFree energyProgress of the reactionCH3ClCH3CH2CCH3CH3ClCH3CH2CCH3CH3CH3CH2CCH
2  HCH3CH3CHCCH
3  HHHClClFigure 11.2
Reaction coordinate diagram for the E1 reaction of 2-chloro-2-methylbutane. The majorproduct is the more substituted alkene because its greater stability causes the transition
state leading to its formation to be more stable.When two elimination products can be formed in an E1 reaction,the major product
is generally the more substituted alkene.
The more substitutedalkene is the more stable of the two alkenes formed in the preced-
ing reaction,and therefore,it has the more stable transition state leading to its formation

(Figure11.2). As a result,the more substituted alkene is formed more rapidly,so it is

the major product. To obtain the more substituted alkene,the hydrogen is removed from

the -carbon bonded to the fewest hydrogens,in accordance with Zaitsev
Õs rule.b3-D Molecule:2-Chloro-2-methyl-butaneCH3CH2CCH3CH3CHCCH
3CH3CH2CH3OCH2ClClCH3CH3CH32-chloro-2-methylbutaneH2O2-methyl-2-butenemajor product2-methyl-1-buteneminor product3 benzylic3
 allylicrelative reactivities of alkyl halides in an E1 reaction  relative stabilities of carbocations2 benzylic2
 allylic1
 benzylic1
 allylic2
1vinyl
3most stableleaststableBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 410
secondary alkyl halides,which,in turn,are more reactive than primary alkyl halides in
both E1 and E2 reactions (Section11.2).
We have seen that the weakest bases are the best leaving groups (Section10.3).
Therefore,for series of alkyl halides with the same alkyl group,alkyl iodides are the

most reactive and alkyl fluorides the least reactive in E1 reactions.
Because the E1 reaction forms a carbocation intermediate,the carbon skeleton
can rearrange before the proton is lost,if rearrangement leads to a more stable car-

bocation. For example,the secondary carbocation that is formed when a chloride ion

dissociates from 3-chloro-2-methyl-2-phenylbutane undergoes a 1,2-methyl shift to

form a more stable tertiary benzylic cation,which then undergoes deprotonation to

form the alkene.
In the following reaction,the initially formed secondary carbocation undergoes a
1,2-hydride shift to form a more stable secondary allylic cation:PROBLEM 5Three alkenes are formed from the E1 reaction of 3-bromo-2,3-dimethylpentane. Give the
structures of the alkenes,and rank them according to the amount that would be formed.

(Ignore stereoisomers.)PROBLEM 6If 2-fluoropentane were to undergo an E1 reaction,would you expect the major product to

be the one predicted by Zaitsev
Õs rule? Explain.relative reactivities of alkyl halides in an E1 reactionincreasing reactivityRI      RBr    RCl    RFleast reactivemost reactiveSection 11.3The E1 Reaction
411CCHCH
3CH3OHClCH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3CCCH
3CH3tertiary benzylic cationsecondary carbocation1,2-methylshift2-methyl-3-phenyl-2-butene3-chloro-2-methyl-
2-phenylbutaneH+CH3CHCHCH
2CHCH2CH3Br5-bromo-2-heptene
CH3CHCHCH
2CHCH2CH3secondary carbocationCH3CHCHCHCH
2CH2CH3CH3CHCHCHCHCH
2CH3secondary allylic cation2,4-heptadieneCH3OH1,2-hydrideshiftH+BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 411
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
Because the given reagent is an acid,start by protonating the molecule at the position that
allows the most stable carbocation to be formed. By protonating the group,a tertiary

allylic carbocation is formed in which the positive charge is delocalized over two other car-

bons. Then move the electrons so that the 1,2-methyl shift required to obtain the product

can take place. Loss of a proton gives the final product.
Now continue on to Problem 7.
PROBLEM 7Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
11.4Competition Between E2 and E1 ReactionsPrimaryalkyl halides undergo only E2 elimination reactions. They cannot undergo E1
reactions because of the difficulty encountered in forming primary carbocations.

Secondaryand tertiaryalkyl halides undergo both E2 and E1 reactions (Table11.3).
For those alkyl halides that can undergo both E2 and E1 reactions,the E2 reaction
is favored by the same factors that favor an reaction and the E1 reaction is favored

by the same factors that favor an reaction. Thus,
an E2 reaction is favored by a
high concentration of a strong base and an aprotic polar solvent (e.g.,DMSO or

DMF),whereas an E1 reaction is favored by a weak base and a protic polar solvent

(e.g.,or ROH).
How the solvent affects the mechanism of the reaction was dis-
cussed in Section10.10.
H2OSN1SN2CH3CH3CH3CH3CClCH3OHCH3CH3H3CHOHHH    OH2CH2CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CH3OpCH2CH3CH3H3CH3OCH2CH3H3C412CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationTutorial:
Common terms for 
E1 and E2 reactionsTable 11.3Summary of the Reactivity of Alkyl Halides in Elimination Reactions
Primary alkyl halide
E2onlySecondary alkyl halide
E1and E2Tertiary alkyl halide
E1and E2BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 412
Section 11.5Stereochemistry of E2 and E1 Reactions
413PROBLEM 8For each of the following reactions,(1)indicate whether elimination will occur via an E2
or an E1 reaction,and (2)give the major elimination product of each reaction,ignoring

stereoisomers:a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 9The rate law for the reaction of with 
tert-butyl bromide to form an elimination product
in 75% ethanol25% water at 30
¡C is the sum of the rate laws for the E2 and E1 reactions:
What percentage of the reaction takes place by the E2 pathway when these conditions exist?
a.b.
11.5Stereochemistry of E2 and E1 Reactions
Stereochemistry of the E2 Reaction
An E2 reaction involves the removal of two groups from adjacent carbons. It is a con-
certed reaction because the two groups are eliminated in the same step. The bonds to

the groups to be eliminated (H and X) must be in the same plane because the orbital

of the carbon bonded to H and the orbital of the carbon bonded to X become over-

lapping porbitals in the alkene product. Therefore,the orbitals must overlap in the tran-
sition state. This overlap is optimal if the orbitals are parallel (i.e.,in the same plane).
There are two ways in which the and bonds can be in the same
plane:They can be parallel to one another either on the same side of the molecule

(syn-periplanar) or on opposite sides of the molecule (anti-periplanar).If an elimination reaction removes two substituents from the same side of the
bond,the reaction is called a 
syn elimination. If the substituents are removed
from opposite sides of the bond,the reaction is called an 
anti elimination.Both types of elimination can occur,but syn elimination is a much slower reaction,so

anti elimination is highly favored in an E2 reaction. One reason anti elimination is

favored is that syn elimination requires the molecule to be in an eclipsed conformation,

whereas anti elimination requires it to be in a more stable,staggered conformation.
CCCCHXHXsubstituents are anti-periplanara staggered conformersubstituents are syn-periplanaran eclipsed conformerCXCHsp3sp3[HO]0.0025 M[HO]5.0 Mrate7.1105[tert-butyl bromide][HO]1.5105[tert-butyl bromide]HOCH3CCHCH
3CH3BrCH3CH3CH2ODMSOCH3CCH3Cl
CH3H2OCH3CCHCH
3CH3BrCH3CH3CH2OHCH3CH2CHCH3BrCH3OHCH3CCH3Cl
CH3HODMFCH3CH2CHCH3BrCH3ODMSOAn E2 reaction involves anti elimination.
BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 413
414CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationSawhorse projections reveal another reason that anti elimination is favored. In syn
elimination,the electrons of the departing hydrogen move to the 
front
side of the carbonbonded to X,whereas in anti elimination,the electrons move to the 
back
side of the car-bon bonded to X. We have seen that displacement reactions involve back-side attack be-

cause the best overlap of the interacting orbitals is achieved through back-side attack

(Section10.2). Finally,anti elimination avoids the repulsion the electron-rich base experi-

ences when it is on the same side of the molecule as the electron-rich departing halide ion.
In Section11.1,we saw that an E2 reaction is 
regioselective,
which means thatmore of one constitutional isomer is formed than the other. For example,the major

product formed from the E2 elimination of 2-bromopentane is 2-pentene.The E2 reaction is also stereoselective,
which means that more of one stereoisomeris formed than the other. For example,the 2-pentene obtained as the major product

from the elimination reaction of 2-bromopentane can exist as a pair of stereoisomers,

and more (E)-2-pentene is formed than (Z)-2-pentene.We can make the following general statement about the stereoselectivity of E2 re-
actions:If the reactant has two hydrogens bonded to the carbon from which a hydro-

gen is to be removed,both the 
Eand Zproducts will be formed because there are two
conformers in which the groups to be eliminated are anti. The alkene with the 
bulkiest
groups on opposite sides of the double bond
will be formed in greater yield because itis the more stable alkene.
Br and Hare antiCH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3HHHHCH3CH3BrHHHCH3BrHCCCH2CH3HHCH3CC(E)-2-pentenemore stable(Z)-2-penteneless stable(E)-2-pentene41%CCHCH
2CH3H3CH(Z)-2-pentene14%CCHHH3CCH2CH3CH3CH2OHCH3CH2OCH3CH2CHCHCH
3CH3CH2CH2CHCH3Br2-pentenemajor product(mixture of E and Z )CH3CH2CH2CHCH
21-penteneminor product2-bromopentaneXanti eliminationback-side attack
baseHXsyn eliminationfront-side attackbaseHWhen two hydrogens are bonded to the
-carbon, the major product of an E2
reaction is the alkene with the bulkiest

substituents on opposite sides of the
double bond.BBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 414
Section 11.5Stereochemistry of E2 and E1 Reactions
415Progress of the reactionFree energy(Z)-2-pentene(E)-2-pentene2-bromopentane
CH3CH2OCH3CH2OHHHH3CCH2CH3HHH3CCH2CH3CCCCZEBrFigure 11.3
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe E2 reaction of 2-bromopentane
and ethoxide ion.3-D Molecule:3-Bromo-2,2,3-
trimethylpentaneThe more stable alkene has the more stable transition state and therefore is formed
more rapidly (Figure11.3). In Section4.11,we saw that the alkene with the

bulkiest groups on the 
sameside of the double bond is less stable because the
electron clouds of the large substituents can interfere with each other,causing

steric strain.Eliminationof HBr from 3-bromo-2,2,3-trimethylpentane leads predominantly to
the Eisomer because this stereoisomer has the methyl group,the bulkiest group on
one carbon,opposite the 
tert-butyl group,the bulkiest group on the other 
carbon.If thefrom which a hydrogen is to be removed is bonded to only one hy-
drogen,there is only one conformer in which the groups to be eliminated are anti.

Therefore,only one alkene product can be formed. The particular isomer that is

formed depends on the configuration of the reactant. For example,anti elimination of

HBr from (2S,3S)-2-bromo-3-phenylbutane forms the 
Eisomer,whereas anti elimina-
tion of HBr from (2
S,3R)-2-bromo-3-phenylbutane forms the 
Zisomer. Notice that the
groups that are not eliminated retain their relative positions. (If you have trouble
b-carbonCH3CH2CCCH3BrCH33-bromo-2,2,3-trimethyl-pentaneCH3CH3CH3CH2OCH3CH2OH(E)-3,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentenemajor productCCCH
3CH3H3CHCH3CCH3(Z)-3,4,4-trimethyl-2-penteneminor productCCCH
3CH3H3CH3CCHCH3sp2sp2H3CCH2CH3HHCCH3CCH2CH3HH(E)-2-pentene(
Z)-2-penteneinteracting electronclouds cause steric strainCCTutorial:
E2 StereochemistryBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 415
416CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationWhen only one hydrogen is bonded to
the -carbon, the major product of an

E2 reaction depends on the structure of

the alkene.BMolecular models can be helpfulwhenever complex stereochemistry 

is involved.understanding how to decide which product is formed,see Problem44 in the Study
Guide and Solutions Manual.)PROBLEM 10a.Determine the major product that would be obtained from an E2 reaction of each of the
following alkyl halides (in each case,indicate the configuration of the product):
1.3.
2.b.Does the product obtained depend on whether you started with the 
Ror Senantiomer ofthe reactant?Stereochemistry of the E1 Reaction
We have seen that an E1 elimination reaction takes place in two steps. The leaving
group leaves in the first step,and a proton is lost from an adjacent carbon in the second

step,following Zaitsev
Õs rule in order to form the more stable alkene. The carbocation
formed in the first step is planar,so the electrons from a departing proton can move to-

ward the positively charged carbon from 
either side. Therefore,both syn and anti elim-
ination can occur.
Because both syn and anti elimination can occur in an E1 reaction,both the 
Eand Zproducts are formed,regardless of whether the -carbon from which the proton is re-

moved is bonded to one or two hydrogens. The major product is the one with the bulkiest

groups on opposite sides of the double bond,because it is the more stable alkene.
bCH3CH2CHCH2ClCH3CH2CHCH2CHClCH2CH3CH2CHCHCH3BrCH3(2S,3S)-2-bromo-3-phenylbutaneCCCH3HHH3CC6H5BrCH3OCH3O(E)-2-phenyl-2-buteneCH3H3CHC6H5BrCH3OH(2S,3R)-2-bromo-3-phenylbutaneCCCH3HHH3CC6H5Br(Z)-2-phenyl-2-buteneCH3H3CHC6H5BrCH3OHCCCCThe major product of an E1 reaction 
is the alkene with the bulkiest
substituents on opposite sides 
of the double bond.CCCCCH3CH2CHCCH
2CH3ClCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CHC
CH2CH3ClH(E)-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexenemajor productH3CCH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3(Z)-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexeneminor productH3CCH3CH3CH2CH2CH3-carbon hasone hydrogenCCCCCH3CH3CH2CHBrCH3HHCH3CCCH3Br-carbon hastwo hydrogensH(E)-2-butenemajor productH3CHHH(Z)-2-buteneminor productH3CCH3HHBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 416
Section 11.6Elimination from Cyclic Compounds
417In contrast,we just saw that an E2 reaction forms both the 
Eand Zproducts only if the-carbon from which the proton is removed is bonded to two hydrogens. If it is bond-
ed to only one hydrogen,only one product is obtained because anti elimination is

favored.
PROBLEM 11SOLVED
For each of the following alkyl halides,determine the major product that is formed when
that alkyl halide undergoes an E1 reaction:
a.c.
b.d.
SOLUTION TO 11a
First,we must consider the regiochemistry of the reaction:More
2-hexene will be formed than 1-hexene because 2-hexene is more stable. Next,we must

consider the stereochemistry of the reaction:Of the 2-hexene that is formed,more

(E)-2-hexene will be formed than (
Z)-2-hexene because (
E)-2-hexene is more stable. Thus,
(E)-2-hexene is the major product of the reaction.
11.6Elimination from Cyclic Compounds
E2 Elimination from Cyclic Compounds
Elimination from cyclic compounds follows the same stereochemical rules as elimina-
tion from open-chain compounds. To achieve the anti-periplanar geometry that is pre-

ferred for an E2 reaction,the two groups that are being eliminated from a cyclic

compound must be trans to one another. In the case of six-membered rings,the groups

being eliminated will be anti-periplanar only if both are in axial positions
.The more stable conformer of chlorocyclohexane does not undergo an E2 reac-
tion,because the chloro substituent is in an equatorial position. (Recall from

Section2.13that the more stable conformer of a monosubstituted cyclohexane is the

one in which the substituent is in an equatorial position because there is more room
groups to be eliminated mustboth be in axial positionsgroups to be eliminated 
must be transHHBrXCH3 ClCH3CH2CH2CCH3ClCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCHCH2CH3ICH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3BrbCCCCCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3Br2-hexene1-hexene
E1CH3CH2CH2CHCHCH
3CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH
2(E)-2-hexeneHCH3CH2CH2HCH3(Z)-2-hexeneCH3CH2CH2HHCH3In an E2 reaction of a substituted
cyclohexane, the groups being

eliminated must both be in axial
positions.BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 417
418CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and Elimination3-D Molecules:Axial chlorocyclohexane;
Equatorial chlorocyclohexaneTutorial:
E2 Eliminations from cyclic
compoundsfor a substituent in that position.) The less stable conformer,with the chloro sub-
stituent in the axial position,readily undergoes an E2 reaction.
Because one of the two conformers does not undergo an E2 reaction,the rate of an
elimination reaction is affected by the stability of the conformer that does undergo the

reaction. The rate constant of the reaction is given by Therefore,the reaction is

faster if is large (i.e.,if elimination takes place by way of the more stable con-

former). If elimination has to take place by way of the less stable conformer,will

be small. For example,neomenthyl chloride undergoes an E2 reaction with ethoxide

ion about 200 times faster than menthyl chloride does. The conformer of neomenthyl

chloride that undergoes elimination is the 
more
stable conformer because when the Cland H are in the required axial positions,the methyl and isopropyl groups are in the

equatorial positions.eqeqeq.HHHClClClHHOE2 conditionsHOE2 conditionsno reactionKeqkequatorialmore stableaxialaxialless stableSir Derek H. R. Barton (1918
Ð1998)was the first to point out that the

chemical reactivity of substituted

cyclohexanes was controlled by their

conformation. Barton was born in
Gravesend,Kent,England. He

received a Ph.D. and a D.Sc. from

Imperial College,London,in 1942

and became a faculty member there

three years later. Subsequently,he

was a professor at the University of

London,the University of Glasgow,

the Institut de Chimie des Substances
Naturelles,and Texas A & M

University. He received the 1969

Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work

on the relationship of the three-

dimensional structures of organic

compounds to their chemical

reactivity. Barton was knighted by

Queen Elizabeth II in 1972.menthyl chlorideCH(CH3)2CH3CH2OHClClClHCH3CH(CH3)2more stableCH3CH(CH3)2CH3less stableCH3CH2OE2 conditionsneomenthyl chlorideE2 conditionsHCH(CH3)2CH(CH3)2ClCH3CH(CH3)2Clmore stableCH3CH3Hless stableCH3CH2OBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 418
d.c.Stamps issued in honor of EnglishNobel laureates: (a)Sir Derek

Barton for conformational analysis,
1969; (b)Sir Walter Haworth for the

synthesis of vitamin C, 1937; (c)A. J.

P. Martin and Richard L. M. Synge

for chromatography, 1952;

(d)William H. Bragg and William L.

Bragg for crystallography, 1915 (the

only father and son to receive a
Nobel Prize).Section 11.6Elimination from Cyclic Compounds
419In contrast,the conformer of menthyl chloride that undergoes elimination is the 
lessstable conformer because when the Cl and H are in the required axial positions,the

methyl and isopropyl groups are also in axial positions.
Notice that when menthyl chloride or 
trans
-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexane under-
goes an E2 reaction,the hydrogen that is eliminated is not removed from the -carbon

bonded to the fewest hydrogens. This may seem like a violation of Zaitsev
Õs rule,but
the rule states that when there is 
more than one
-carbon from which a hydrogen can
be removed,the hydrogen is removed from the -carbon bonded to the fewest hydro-

gens. In the preceding two reactions,the hydrogen that is removed has to be in an axial

position and only one -carbon has a hydrogen in an axial position. Therefore,that

hydrogen is the one that is removed even though it is not bonded to the -carbon with

the fewest hydrogens.
PROBLEM 12Why do cis-1-bromo-2-ethylcyclohexane and 
trans
-1-bromo-2-ethylcyclohexane form
different major products when they undergo an E2 reaction?
PROBLEM 13Which isomer reacts more rapidly in an E2 reaction,
cis-1-bromo-4-tert-butylcyclohexane
or trans
-1-bromo-4-tert-butylcyclohexane? Explain your choice.
E1 Elimination from Cyclic Compounds
When a substituted cyclohexane undergoes an E1 reaction,the two groups that are
eliminated do not have to both be in axial positions,because the elimination reaction is

not concerted. In the following reaction,a carbocation is formed in the first step. It

then loses a proton from the adjacent carbon that is bonded to the fewest hydrogens
Ñin other words,Zaitsev
Õs rule is followed.
HClCH3CH3ClHHCH3CH3OHE1 conditionsCH3CH3CH3not in an equatorial 
positionequatorialHClHHHClHH2OCH3CH3Htrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexaneHCH3axialaxialHOE2 conditionsmore stableless stableClbbbbba.An E1 reaction involves both syn and
anti elimination.b.BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 419
420CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationBecause a carbocation is formed in an E1 reaction,you must check for the possibil-
ity of a carbocation rearrangement before you use Zaitsev
Õs rule to determine the elim-ination product. In the following reaction,the secondary carbocation undergoes a

1,2-hydride shift,in order to form a more stable tertiary carbocation.
Table11.4summarizes the stereochemical outcome of substitution and elimination
reactions.HHCH3CH3BrHCH3CH3OHHE1 conditionsCH3HBrHHCH3CH3HHH1,2-hydride shiftsecondary carbocationtertiary carbocationCH3CH3Table 11.4Stereochemistry of Substitution and Elimination Reactions
MechanismProducts
Both stereosiomers (Rand S) are formed (more inverted than retained).
E1Both 
Eand Zstereoisomers are formed (more of the stereoisomer withthe bulkiest groups on opposite sides of the double bond).
Only the inverted product is formed.
E2Both 
Eand Zstereoisomers are formed (more of the stereoisomer withthe bulkiest groups on opposite sides of the double bond is formed)

unless the -carbon of the reactant is bonded to only one hydrogen,in

which case only one stereoisomer is formed,with a configuration that

depends on the configuration of the reactant.
bSN2SN1PROBLEM 14Give the substitution and elimination products for the following reactions,showing the
configuration of each product:
a.b.c.d.e.f.
CH3OHSN1/E1 conditionsCH3HBrCH3CH2CCH3HBrCH3CH2CH3OSN2/E2 conditionsCtrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexaneCH3OHSN1/E1 conditionstrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexaneCH3OSN2/E2 conditions(S)-2-chlorohexaneCH3OHSN1/E1 conditions(S)-2-chlorohexaneCH3OSN2/E2 conditionsBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 420
Section 11.7A Kinetic Isotope Effect
42111.7A Kinetic Isotope Effect
A mechanism
is a model that accounts for all the experimental evidence that is known
about a reaction. For example,the mechanisms of the E1,and E2 reactions

are based on a knowledge of the rate law of the reaction,the relative reactivities of the

reactants,and the structures of the products.
Another piece of experimental evidence that is helpful in determining the mecha-
nism of a reaction is the 
deuterium kinetic isotope effect
Ñthe ratio of the rate con-
stant observed for a compound containing hydrogen to the rate constant observed for

an identical compound in which one or more of the hydrogens has been replaced by

deuterium,an isotope of hydrogen. Recall that the nucleus of a deuterium has one pro-

ton and one neutron,whereas the nucleus of a hydrogen contains only a proton

(Section1.1).
The chemical properties of deuterium and hydrogen are similar; however,a 
bond is about stronger than a bond. Therefore,it is

more difficult to break a bond than a corresponding bond.
When the rate constant for elimination of HBr from 1-bromo-2-phenylethane
is compared with the rate constant for elimination of DBr from 2-bromo-

1,1-dideuterio-1-phenylethane (determined under identical conditions),is found to

be 7.1 times greater than The deuterium kinetic isotope effect,therefore,is 7.1.

The difference in the reaction rates is due to the difference in energy required to break

a bond compared with a bond.
Because the deuterium kinetic isotope effect is greater than unity for this reaction,we
know that the (or ) bond must be broken in the rate-determining step
Ñafact that is consistent with the mechanism proposed for an E2 reaction.
PROBLEM 15List the following compounds in order of decreasing reactivity in an E2 reaction:
PROBLEM 16If the two reactions described in this section were E1 elimination reactions,what value
would you expect to obtain for the deuterium kinetic isotope effect?
CH3CCH3CH3ClCH3CCH3CH3FCH3CCH3CH3BrCD3CCD3CD3FCH3CCD3CD3FCDCHCDCHD.H(D)(H)CHCDCH(5 kJmol)1.2 kcalmolCDkHkDdeuterium kinetic isotope effect  rate constant for H-containing reactantrate constant for D-containing reactantSN2,SN1,CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2OkHCH3CH2OH1-bromo-2-phenylethaneCHCH
2CH3CH2OHBrCD2CH2BrCH
3CH2OkDCH3CH2OH2-bromo-1,1-dideuterio-1-phenylethaneCDCH
2CH3CH2ODBrBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 421
422CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationTable 11.5Relative Reactivities of Alkyl Halides
In an reaction:In an reaction:
In an E2 reaction:In an E1 reaction:
3¡2¡1¡3¡2¡1¡3¡2¡1¡SN11¡2¡3¡SN211.8Competition Between Substitutionand EliminationYou have seen that alkyl halides can undergo four types of reactions:E2,
and E1. At this point,it may seem a bit overwhelming to be given an alkyl halide and

a nucleophile/base and asked to predict the products of the reaction. So we need to or-

ganize what we know about the reactions of alkyl halides to make it a little easier to

predict the products of any given reaction.
First we must decide whether the reaction conditions favor or re-
actions. (Recall that the conditions that favor an reaction also favor an E2 reaction

and the conditions that favor an reaction also favor an E1 reaction.) The decision

is easy if the reactant is a primaryalkyl halide
Ñit undergoes only reactions.
Primary carbocations are too unstable to be formed,so primary alkyl halides cannot

undergo reactions.
If the reactant is a secondaryor a tertiaryalkyl halide,it may undergo either
or reactions,depending on the reaction conditions. reactions
are favored by a high concentration of a good nucleophile/strong base,whereas
reactions are favored by a poor nucleophile/weak base (Sections10.9and
11.4). In addition,the solvent in which the reaction is carried out can influence the

mechanism (Section10.10).
Having decided whether the conditions favor reactions or reac-
tions,we must next decide how much of the product will be the substitution product

and how much will be the elimination product. The relative amounts of substitution

and elimination products will depend on whether the alkyl halide is primary,sec-

ondary,or tertiary,and on the nature of the nucleophile/base. This is discussed in the

next section and is summarized later in Table11.6.
ConditionsLetÕs first consider conditions that lead to reactions (a high concentration of a
good nucleophile/strong base). The negatively charged species can act as a nucleo-

phile and attack the back side of the -carbon to form the substitution product,or it

can act as a base and remove a -hydrogen,leading to the elimination product. Thus,

the two reactions compete with each other. Notice that both reactions occur for the

same reasonÑthe electron-withdrawing halogen gives the carbon to which it is bond-
ed a partial positive charge.
The relative reactivities of alkyl halides in and E2 reactions are shown in
Table11.5. Because a 
primaryalkyl halide is the most reactive in an reaction and
the least reactive in an E2 reaction,a primary alkyl halide forms principally the substi-

tution product in a reaction carried out under conditions that favor reactions.

In other words,substitution wins the competition.
SN2E2SN2SN2substitutionproductCH3HOCH2CH3CH2OHBrBreliminationproductCH2HOCH2CH2CH2BrHH2OBrbaSN2E2SN2E2SN1E1SN2E2SN1E1SN2E2SN1E1SN2E2SN1E1SN2E2SN1SN2SN1E1SN2E2SN1,SN2,BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 422
Section 11.8Competition Between Substitution and Elimination
423A bulky base encourages eliminationover substitution.A weak base encourages substitutionover elimination.However,if either the primary alkyl halide or the nucleophile/base is sterically hin-
dered,the nucleophile will have difficulty getting to the back side of the -carbon.

As a result,elimination will win the competition,so the elimination product will

predominate.A secondaryalkyl halide can form both substitution and elimination products under
conditions. The relative amounts of the two products depend on the base
strength and the bulk of the nucleophile/base. 
The stronger and bulkier the base,the
greater the percentage of the elimination product.
For example,acetic acid is a
stronger acid than ethanol which means that acetate ion

is a weaker base than ethoxide ion. The elimination product is the main product

formed from the reaction of 2-chloropropane with the strongly basic ethoxide ion,

whereas no elimination product is formed with the weakly basic acetate ion. The

percentage of elimination product produced would be increased further if the bulky

tert-butoxide ion were used instead of ethoxide ion (Section10.3).
A tertiaryalkyl halide is the least reactive of the alkyl halides in an reaction
and the most reactive in an E2 reaction (Table11.5). Consequently,only the elimina-

tion product is formed when a tertiary alkyl halide reacts with a nucleophile/base

under conditions.
SN2E2SN2pa15.9,pa4.76SN2E2aa primaryalkyl halideCH3OHpropyl bromidemethyl propyl ether
90%propene10%CH3CH2CH2BrCH
3OCH3CH2CH2OCH3CH3CHCH
3OHCH2BrCH3OHthe primary alkyl halide is sterically hinderedCH3CH3CH31-bromo-2-methyl-propaneisobutyl methyl ether40%2-methylpropene60%CH3CHCH2BrCH
3OCH3CHCH2OCH3CH3CCH
3OHCH2Br(CH3)3COHthe nucleophile is sterically hinderedCH3CH3CH3CH31-bromopentanetert-butyl pentyl ether15%1-pentene85%CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3COCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OCCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCH
3COHCH2Bra secondaryalkyl halidea strong base favors
the elimination producta weak base favors the
substitution product2-chloropropaneethoxide ion2-ethoxypropane
25%propene75%CH3CHCH3CH3CH2OCH3CHCH3OCH2CH3ClOCH3CHCH
2ClCH3CH2OHCH3CH2OH2-chloropropaneacetate ionisopropyl acetate
100%CH3CHCH3CH3COCH3CHCH3OCCH3ClOClacetic acidBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 423
424CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationTable 11.6Summary of the Products Expected in Substitution and Elimination Reactions
Class of alkyl halideversus E2versus E1
Primary alkyl halidePrimarily substitution,unless there is steric hindrance Cannot undergo reactions
in the alkyl halide or nucleophile,in which case

elimination is favored
Secondary alkyl halideBoth substitution and elimination; the stronger and bulkier Both substitution and elimination
the base,the greater is the percentage of elimination
Tertiary alkyl halideOnly eliminationBoth substitution and elimination
SN1E1SN1SN2PROBLEM 17How would you expect the ratio of substitution product to elimination product formed
from the reaction of propyl bromide with in methanol to change when the nucleo-

phile is changed to PROBLEM 18Only a substitution product is obtained when the following compound is treated with sodi-

um methoxide:Explain why an elimination product is not obtained.ConditionsNow let
Õs look at what happens when conditions favor reactions (a poor
nucleophile/weak base). In reactions,the alkyl halide dissociates to form a

carbocation,which can then either combine with the nucleophile to form the substitu-

tion product or lose a proton to form the elimination product.Alkyl halides have the same order of reactivity in reactions as they do in E1 re-
actions because both reactions have the same rate-determining step
Ñdissociation ofthe alkyl halide (Table11.5). This means that all alkyl halides that react under 

conditions will give both substitution and elimination products. Remember that prima-

ry alkyl halides do not undergo reactions because primary carbocations are

too unstable to be formed.Table11.6summarizes the products obtained when alkyl halides react with nucleo-
philes/bases under and conditions.
SN1E1SN2E2SN1E1SN1E1SN1CHCH3OCCCHCOHCHCBr
BrH3OH2OsubstitutionH2OeliminationSN1E1SN1E1SN1E1CH3CH3BrCH3S?CH3O2-bromo-2-methyl-propane2-methylpropeneCH3CBrCH
3CH2OCH3CCH
2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2OHBrCH3CH2OHa tertiary alkylhalide3-D Molecule:2-Methyl-1-propeneBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 424
Section 11.9Substitution and Elimination Reactions in Synthesis
425PROBLEM 19Indicate whether the alkyl halides listed will give mostly substitution products,mostly
elimination products,or about equal amounts of substitution and elimination products

when they react with the following:
a.methanol under conditions
b.sodium methoxide under conditions
1.1-bromobutane3.2-bromobutane
2.1-bromo-2-methylpropane4.2-bromo-2-methylpropane
PROBLEM 201-Bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane has difficulty undergoing either or reactions.
a.Explain why.b.Can it undergo E2 and E1 reactions?
11.9Substitution and Elimination Reactions in SynthesisWhen substitution or elimination reactions are used in synthesis,care must be taken to
choose reactants and reaction conditions that will maximize the yield of the desired
product. In Section10.4,you saw that nucleophilic substitution reactions of alkyl

halides can lead to a wide variety of organic compounds. For example,ethers are syn-

thesized by the reaction of an alkyl halide with an alkoxide ion. This reaction,discov-

ered by Alexander Williamson in 1850,is still considered one of the best ways to

synthesize an ether.
The alkoxide ion for the 
Williamson ether synthesis
is prepared by using
sodium metal or sodium hydride (NaH) to remove a proton from an alcohol.
The Williamson ether synthesis is a nucleophilic substitution reaction. It is an
reaction because it requires a high concentration of a good nucleophile. If youwant to synthesize an ether such as butyl propyl ether,you have a choice of starting

materials:You can use either a propyl halide and butoxide ion or a butyl halide and

propoxide ion.If,however,you want to synthesize 
tert-butyl ethyl ether,the starting materials must
be an ethyl halide and tert-butoxide ion. If you tried to use a 
tert-butyl halide and
ethoxide ion as reactants,you would obtain the elimination product and little or no

ether because the reaction of a tertiary alkyl halide under conditions forms

primarily the elimination product. So,in carrying out a Williamson ether synthesis,the
SN2E2propyl bromidebutoxide ionbutyl propyl ether
CH3CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH2CH2OCH2CH2CH2CH3Brbutyl bromidepropoxide ionbutyl propyl ether
CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2OCH3CH2CH2OCH2CH2CH2CH3BrSN2ROHNaRO
Na12H2ROHNaHRO
NaH2(RO)Williamson ether synthesisalkyl halidealkoxide ionether
RBr
RORORBrSN1SN2SN2E2SN1E1Alexander William Williamson
(1824Ð1904)was born in London toScottish parents. As a child,he lost

an arm and the use of an eye. He was

midway through his medical

education when he changed his mind

and decided to study chemistry. He

received a Ph.D. from the University

of Geissen in 1846. In 1849,he

became a professor of chemistry at

University College,London.
Tutorial:
E2 Promoting factorsBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 425
less hindered alkyl group should be provided by the alkyl halide and the more hin-
dered alkyl group should come from the alkoxide.
PROBLEM 21What other organic product will be formed when the alkyl halide used in the synthesis of
butyl propyl ether is
a.propyl bromide?
b.butyl bromide?
PROBLEM 22How could the following ethers be prepared,using an alkyl halide and an alcohol?
a.c.

b.d.
In Section6.10,you saw that alkynes can be synthesized by the reaction of an
acetylide anion with an alkyl halide.
Now that you know that this is an reaction (the alkyl halide reacts with a high con-
centration of a good nucleophile),you can understand why it is best to use primary

alkyl halides and methyl halides in the reaction. These alkyl halides are the only ones

that form primarily the desired substitution product. A tertiary alkyl halide would form

only the elimination product,and a secondary alkyl halide would form mainly the

elimination product because the acetylide ion is a very strong base.
If you want to synthesize an alkene,you should choose the most hindered alkyl
halide in order to maximize the elimination product and minimize the substitution

product. For example,2-bromopropane would be a better starting material than

1-bromopropane for the synthesis of propene because the secondary alkyl halide

would give a higher yield of the desired elimination product and a lower yield of the

competing substitution product. The percentage of alkene could be further increased

by using a sterically hindered base such as 
tert-butoxide ion instead of hydroxide ion.
2-bromopropanemajor productminor product
HOCH3CHCH3BrOHCH3CHCH
2H2OCH3CHCH3Br1-bromopropaneminor productmajor product
HOCH3CH2CH2BrCH3CHCH
2H2OBr
CH3CH2CH2OH
SN2CH3CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CCCH3CH2CCCH
2CH2CH3BrCH3CH2OCH2CHCH2CH2CH3CH3OCCH3CH3CH3CH2OCH3CH2CHOCH2CH2CH3CH3426CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationIn synthesizing an ether, the less
hindered group should be provided 

by the alkyl halide.ethyl bromidetert-butoxide iontert-butyl ethyl etheretheneCH3CH2BrCH
3COCH3CH3CH3CH2OCCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2BrCH3COHethoxide iontert-butyl bromide2-methylpropeneCH3CH2OCH3CBrCH3CH3CH3CH2CCH3BrCH3CH2OHBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 426
To synthesize 2-methyl-2-butene from 2-bromo-2-methylbutane,you would use
conditions (a high concentration of in an aprotic polar solvent) because
a tertiary alkyl halide gives 
onlythe elimination product under those conditions. If
conditions were used (a low concentration of in water),both elimination
and substitution products would be obtained.
PROBLEM 23Identify the three products that are formed when 2-bromo-2-methylpropane is dissolved in
a mixture of 80% ethanol and 20% water.
PROBLEM 24a.What products (including stereoisomers if applicable) would be formed from the reac-
tion of 3-bromo-2-methylpentane with under conditions and under
conditions?b.Answer the same question for 3-bromo-3-methylpentane.
11.10Consecutive E2 Elimination ReactionsAlkyl dihalides can undergo two consecutive dehydrohalogenations,giving products
that contain two double bonds. In the following example,Zaitsev
Õs rule predicts themost stable product of the first dehydrohalogenation,but not the most stable product

of the second. The reason Zaitsev
Õs rule fails in the second reaction is that a conjugat-
ed diene is more stable than an isolated diene.If the two halogens are on the same carbon (geminal dihalides) or on adjacent car-
bons (vicinal dihalides),the two consecutive E2 dehydrohalogenations can result in

the formation of a triple bond. This is how alkynes are commonly synthesized.
NH2NH2a geminal dibromidea vinylic bromide
RCH2CRBrBrBrRCHCR2 Br
2 NH3an alkyneRCCR
NH2NH2a vicinal dichloridea vinylic chloride
RCHCHRClClClRCHCR2 Br
2 NH3an alkyneRCCR
SN1E1SN2E2HOHOSN1E1HOSN2E2Section 11.10Consecutive E2 Elimination Reactions
427CH32-bromo-2-methylbutane2-methyl-2-butene2-methyl-2-butanolSN2/E2conditionsSN1/E1conditionsHOCH3CCH2CH3CH3BrCH3CCHCH
3H2OBrCH3CH3CCH3OHCH3CCH2CH3CHCH3H2OBrHOHO3,5-dichloro-2,6-dimethylheptane5-chloro-2,6-dimethyl-2-heptene
CH3CHCHCH2CHCHCH3CH3ClCH3ClCH3CH3ClCH3CCHCH
2CHCHCH32 Cl2 H2O2,6-dimethyl-2,4-heptadieneCH3CH3CH3CCHCHCH
3CHCHBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 427
428CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationThe vinylic halide intermediates in the preceding reactions are relatively unreactive.
Consequently,a very strong base,such as is needed for the second elimination.

If a weaker base,such as is used at room temperature,the reaction will stop at

the vinylic halide and no alkyne will be formed.
Because a vicinal dihalide is formed from the reaction of an alkene with or 
you have just learned how to convert a double bond into a triple bond.
PROBLEM 25Why isnÕt a cumulated diene formed in the preceding reaction?11.11Intermolecular Versus Intramolecular Reactions
A molecule with two functional groups is called a 
bifunctional molecule. If the two
functional groups are able to react with each other,two kinds of reactions can occur. If

we take as an example a molecule whose two functional groups are a nucleophile and

a leaving group,the nucleophile of one molecule can displace the leaving group of a

second molecule of the compound. Such a reaction is called an intermolecular reac-

tion. Interis Latin for 
Òbetween,Óso an 
intermolecular reaction
takes place between
two molecules. If the product of each intermolecular reaction subsequently reacts with

another bifunctional molecule,a polymer will be formed (Chapter28).
Alternatively,the nucleophile of a molecule can displace the leaving group of the
same molecule,thereby forming a cyclic compound. Such a reaction is called an in-

tramolecular reaction. Intra
is Latin for 
Òwithin,Óso an 
intramolecular reaction
takes
place within a single molecule.Which reaction is more likely to occur
Ñan intermolecular reaction or an intramol-ecular reaction? The answer depends on the 
concentration
of the bifunctional mole-cule and the size of the ringthat will be formed in the intramolecular reaction.The intramolecular reaction has an advantage:The reacting groups are tethered to-
gether,so they don
Õt have to diffuse through the solvent to find a group with which to
react. Therefore,a low concentration of reactant favors an intramolecular reaction be-

cause the two functional groups have a better chance of finding one another if they are

in the same molecule. A high concentration of reactant helps compensate for the ad-

vantage gained by tethering.
How much of an advantage an intramolecular reaction has over an intermolecular
reaction depends on the size of the ring that is formedÑthat is,on the length of the
tether. If the intramolecular reaction forms a five-or six-membered ring,it will be

highly favored over the intermolecular reaction because five-and six-membered rings

are stable and,therefore,easily formed.
an intramolecular reactionOBrCH
2(CH2)nCH2O(CH2)nH2CCH
2BrCl2,Br2HO,NH2,NH2NH2BrBrBrCH3CHCCH
3CH3CHCHCH3Br2CH2Cl2CH3CHCHCH
32-butyne2-buteneCH3CCCH
32 Br2 NH3an intermolecular reactionBrCH2(CH2)nCH2OBrCH
2(CH2)nCH2OBrCH2(CH2)nCH2OCH2(CH2)nCH2OBrBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 428
Section 11.12Designing a Synthesis II: Approaching the Problem
429Three-and four-membered rings are strained,so they are less stable than five-and six-
membered rings and,therefore,are less easily formed. The higher activation energy

for three-and four-membered ring formation cancels some of the advantage gained by

tethering.Three-membered ring compounds are formed more easily than four-membered ring
compounds. To form a cyclic ether,the nucleophilic oxygen atom must be oriented so

that it can attack the back side of the carbon bonded to the halogen. Rotation about a
bond in the molecule forms conformations with the groups pointed away from
one another. The molecule leading to formation of a three-membered ring ether has

one bond that can rotate,whereas the molecule leading to formation of a four-

membered ring has two bonds that can rotate. Therefore,molecules that form

three-membered rings are more apt to have their reacting groups in the conformation

required for reaction.The likelihood of the reacting groups finding each other decreases sharply when the
groups are in compounds that would form seven-membered and larger rings. There-

fore,the intramolecular reaction becomes less favored as the ring size increases beyond

six members.PROBLEM 26Which compound,upon treatment with sodium hydride,would form a cyclic ether more
rapidly?11.12Designing a Synthesis II: Approaching the Problem
When you are asked to design a synthesis,one way to approach the problem is to look
at the given starting material to see whether there is an obvious series of reactions that

can get you started on the pathway to the 
target molecule
(the desired product).Sometimes this is the best way to approach a 
simplesynthesis. The examples that fol-
low will give you practice in designing a successful synthesis.
HOBrHOBrHOBrHOBrHOBrHOBra.b.c.oror
orBrOBr
Oone C     C bondcan rotatetwo C     C bondscan rotateCCCCCCCH2CH2ClClBrBrCH2CH2CH2H2CH2CH3CCH
3H2COONH2C(CH3)2NBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 429
430CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationExample 1.How could you prepare 1,3-cyclohexadiene from cyclohexane?
Since the only reaction an alkane can undergo is halogenation,deciding what the first
reaction should be is easy. An E2 reaction using a high concentration of a strong and

bulky base to encourage elimination over substitution will form cyclohexene. There-

fore,tert-butoxide ion is used as the base and 
tert-butyl alcohol is used as the solvent.
Bromination of cyclohexene will give an allylic bromide,which will form the desired

target molecule by undergoing another E2 reaction.
Example 2.Starting with methylcyclohexane,how could you prepare the following
vicinal trans
-dihalide?Again,since the starting material is an alkane,the first reaction must be a radical
substitution. Bromination leads to selective substitution of the tertiary hydrogen.

Under E2 conditions,tertiary alkyl halides undergo only elimination,so there will be

no competing substitution product in the next reaction. Because addition of in-

volves only anti addition,the target molecule (as well as its enantiomer) is obtained.
As you saw in Section6.11,working backward can be a useful way to design a
synthesisÑparticularly when the starting material does not clearly indicate how to
proceed. Look at the target molecule and ask yourself how it could be prepared. Once

you have an answer,work backward to the next compound,asking yourself how 
itcould be prepared. Keep working backward one step at a time,until you get to a readily

available starting material. This technique is called 
retrosynthetic analysis.
Example 3.How could you prepare ethyl methyl ketone from 1-bromobutane?
At this point,you know only one way to synthesize a ketone
Ñthe addition of water
to an alkyne (Section6.6). The alkyne can be prepared from two successive E2 re-

actions of a vicinal dihalide,which in turn can be synthesized from an alkene. The

desired alkene can be prepared from the given starting material by an elimination

reaction.CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CCH3O?Br2?CH3CH3BrBr?BrBr2BrNBSperoxidehighconcentrationtert-BuOtert-BuOHhighconcentrationtert-BuOtert-BuOHhBrCH3CH3CH3Br2CH2Cl2highconcentrationCH3CH2OCH3CH2OHBr2hCH3BrBrBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 430
Section 11.12Designing a Synthesis II: Approaching the Problem
431Now the reaction sequence can be written in the forward direction,indicating the
reagents needed to carry out each reaction. A bulky base is used in the elimination

reaction in order to maximize the amount of elimination product.Example 4.How could the following cyclic ether be prepared from the given starting
material?In orderto obtain a cyclic ether,the two groups required for ether synthesis (the alkyl
halide and the alcohol) must be in the same molecule. To obtain a five-membered ring,

the carbons bearing the two groups must be separated by two additional carbons.

Addition of water to the given starting material will give the required bifunctional

compound.PROBLEM 27How could you have prepared the target molecule in the preceding synthesis using
4-penten-1-ol as the starting material? Which synthesis would give you a higher yield

of the target molecule?
HH2ONaHBrCH
2CH2CH2CHCH3CH2BrCH
2CH2CH2CHOHOCH3target moleculesynthesisCH2BrCH
2CH2CH2CHCH3BrCH
2CH2CH2CHOHOtarget moleculeCH3retrosynthetic analysisCH2BrCH
2CH2CH2CHOCH3?Tutorial:
Retrosynthetic analysisCH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2CCH
3CH2CHCH2BrCH
3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCHBrOretrosynthetic analysistarget moleculeCH3CH2CCH3CH2CCH3OCHCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CHCH
3CH2CHCH2BrCH2Brtarget moleculeBr2CH2Cl2H2OH2SO4HgSO4NH2highconcentrationtert-BuOtert-BuOHsynthesisBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 431
432CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationPROBLEM 28Design a multistep synthesis to show how each of the following compounds could be pre-
pared from the given starting material:
a.b.c.d.e.CH2CH3BrCH
2CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2BrOCHCH2CH2CHOOOHSummaryIn addition to undergoing nucleophilic substitution reac-
tions,alkyl halides undergo :The

halogen is removed from one carbon and a proton is re-

moved from an adjacent carbon. A double bond is formed

between the two carbons from which the atoms are elimi-

nated. Therefore,the product of an elimination reaction is

an alkene. Removal of a proton and a halide ion is

calleddehydrohalogenation
. There are two important
reactions,E1 and E2.
An E2 reaction
is a concerted,one-step reaction; the
proton and the halide ion are removed in the same step,so

no intermediate is formed. In an 
E1 reaction
,the alkyl
halide dissociates,forming a carbocation. In a second step,

a base removes a proton from a carbon that is adjacent to

the positively charged carbon. Because the E1 reaction

forms a carbocation intermediate,the carbon skeleton can

rearrange before the proton is lost.Primary alkyl halides undergo only E2 elimination re-
actions. Secondary and tertiary alkyl halides undergo both

E2 and E1 reactions. For alkyl halides that can undergo

both E2 and E1 reactions,the E2 reaction is favored by the

same factors that favor an reaction
Ña high concen-tration of a strong base and an aprotic polar solvent
Ñandthe E1 reaction is favored by the same factors that favor an
reactionÑa weak base and a protic polar solvent.
An E2 reaction is regioselective. The major product is the
more stable alkene,unless the reactants are sterically hin-

dered or the leaving group is poor. The more stable alkene is
SN1SN2b-eliminationB-elimination reactionsgenerally (but not always) the more substituted alkene. The
more substituted alkene is predicted by Zaitsev
Õs rule:It is
the alkene formed when a proton is removed from the 
-carbon that is bonded to the fewest hydrogens.
An E2 reaction is stereoselective:If the -carbon has two
hydrogens,both 
Eand Zproducts will be formed,but the
one with the bulkiest groups on opposite sides of the double

bond is more stable and will be formed in greater yield. 
Antieliminationis favored in an E2 reaction. If the -carbon has
only one hydrogen,only one alkene is formed,since there is

only one conformer in which the groups to be eliminated are

anti. If the reactant is a cyclic compound,the two groups to

be eliminated must be trans to one another; in the case of
six-membered rings,both groups must be in axial positions.

Elimination is more rapid when H and X are diaxial in the

more stable conformer.
An E1 reaction is regioselective. The major product is
the most stable alkene,which is generally the most substi-

tuted alkene. An E1 reaction is stereoselective. The major

product is the alkene with the bulkiest groups on opposite

sides of the double bond. The carbocation formed in the

first step can undergo both syn and anti elimination; there-

fore,the two groups to be eliminated in a cyclic compound

do not have to be trans or both in axial positions. Alkyl sub-

stitution increases the stability of a carbocation and de-
creases the stability of a carbanion.Predicting which products are formed when an alkyl
halide undegoes a reaction begins with determining whether
bbbBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 432
Key Terms
433the conditions favor or reactions. When
reactions are favored,primary alkyl halides form
primarily substitution products unless the nucleophile/base
is sterically hindered,in which case elimination products

predominate. Secondary alkyl halides form both substitution

and elimination products; the stronger and bulkier the base,

the greater is the percentage of the elimination product. Ter-

tiary alkyl halides form only elimination products. When
conditions are favored,secondary and tertiary alkyl
halides form both substitution and elimination products;

primary alkyl halides do not undergo reactions.
SN1E1SN1E1SN2E2SN1E1SN2E2If the two halogens are on the same or adjacent carbons,
two consecutive E2 dehydrohalogenations can result in the

formation of a triple bond. The 
Williamson ether synthesis
involves the reaction of an alkyl halide with an alkoxide ion.

If the two functional groups of a 
bifunctional moleculecan react with each other,both 
intermolecularandintramolecular reactions
can occur. The reaction that is
more likely to occur depends on the concentration of the

bifunctional molecule and the size of the ring that will be
formed in the intramolecular reaction.Summary of Reactions1.E2 reaction:a one-step mechanism
Relative reactivities of alkyl halides:
Anti elimination; both 
Eand Zstereoisomers are formed. The isomer with the bulkiest groups on opposite sides of the double bond
will be formed in greater yield. If the -carbon from which the hydrogen is removed is bonded to only one hydrogen,only one elim
-ination product is formed. Its configuration depends on the configuration of the reactant.
2.E1 reaction:a two-step mechanism with a carbocation intermediate
Relative reactivities of alkyl halides:
Anti and syn elimination; both Eand Zstereoisomers are formed. The isomer with the bulkiest groups on opposite sides of the dou-
ble bond will be formed in greater yield.Competing and E2 Reactions
Primary alkyl halides:primarily substitution
Secondary alkyl halides:substitution and elimination

Tertiary alkyl halides:only elimination
Competing and E1 Reactions
Primary alkyl halides:cannot undergo or E1 reactions
Secondary alkyl halides:substitution and elimination
Tertiary alkyl halides:substitution and elimination
SN1SN1SN23¡2¡1¡CHCCHCCCXBBHXb3¡2¡1¡CHBCCCXBHX
Key Terms
anti elimination (p.413)
anti-periplanar (p.413)

bifunctional molecule (p.428)

dehydrohalogenation (p.402)

deuterium kinetic isotope effect (p.421)

elimination reaction (p.400)
reaction (p.402)
E1 reaction (p.408)

E2 reaction (p.401)

1,2-elimination reaction (p.402)

intermolecular reaction (p.428)

intramolecular reaction (p.428)
b-eliminationsyn elimination (p.413)
syn-periplanar (p.413)

target molecule (p.429)

Williamson ether synthesis (p.425)

Zaitsev
Õs rule (p.404)
BRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 433
434CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and EliminationProblems
29.Give the major product obtained when each of the following alkyl halides undergoes an E2 reaction:
30.Give the major product obtained when the alkyl halides in Problem29 undergo an E1 reaction.
31.a.Indicate how each of the following factors affects an E1 reaction:
1.the structure of the alkyl halide3.the concentration of the base

2.the strength of the base4.the solvent
b.Indicate how each of the same factors affects an E2 reaction.
32.Dr. Don T. Doit wanted to synthesize the anesthetic 2-ethoxy-2-methylpropane. He used ethoxide ion and 2-chloro-2-methyl-
propane for his synthesis and ended up with very little ether. What was the predominant product of his synthesis? What reagents

should he have used?
33.Which reactant in each of the following pairs will undergo an elimination reaction more rapidly? Explain your choice.
a.b.
34.For each of the following reactions,give the elimination products; if the products can exist as stereoisomers,indicate which
isomers are obtained.a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.35.Indicate which of the compounds in each pair will give a higher substitution/elimination ratio when it reacts with isopropyl
bromide:a.ethoxide ion or 
tert-butoxide ionc.or 
b.or d.or CH
3OCH3SSCNOCNBrCl3-bromo-3-methylpentaneH2O3-bromo-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of HOtrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexaneCH3OHtrans-1-chloro-2-methylcyclohexanehigh concentration of CH3O()-2-bromohexaneH2O()-2-bromohexanehigh concentration of HOCH3CH3OCH3OHCH3HHHBrCH3OCH3OHCH3HHBrHCH3(CH3)3CClHOH2O(CH3)3CIHOH2OClCH3CHCH2CH3BrCH3CHCH2CH3a.d.e.f.g.b.ClCH3CHCH2CH2CH3c.ClCH2ClCH3ClCH3ClBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 434
Problems43536.Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing reactivity in an E2 reaction:
37.Using the given starting material and any necessary organic or inorganic reagents,indicate how the desired compounds could b
esynthesized:a.d.
b.e.
c.38.When 2-bromo-2,3-dimethylbutane reacts with a base under E2 conditions,two alkenes (2,3-dimethyl-1-butene and 2,3-dimethyl-
2-butene) are formed.

a.Which of the bases shown would give the highest percentage of the 1-alkene?

b.Which would give the highest percentage of the 2-alkene?
39.a.Give the structure of the products obtained from the reaction of each enantiomer of 
cis-1-chloro-2-isopropylcyclopentane with
a high concentration of sodium methoxide in methanol.b.Are all the products optically active?

c.How would the products differ if the starting material were the trans isomer? Are all these products optically active?

d.Will the cis enantiomers or the trans enantiomers form substitution products more rapidly?

e.Will the cis enantiomers or the trans enantiomers form elimination products more rapidly?
40.Starting with cyclohexane,how could the following compounds be prepared?
a.trans
-1,2-dichlorocyclohexaneb.2-cyclohexenol
41.The rate constant of an intramolecular reaction depends on the size of the ring (
n) that is formed. Explain the relative rates of
formation of the cyclic secondary ammonium ions.
42.cis-1-Bromo-4-tert-butylcyclohexane and 
trans
-1-bromo-4-tert-butylcyclohexane both react with sodium ethoxide in ethanol to
give 4-
tert-butylcyclohexene. Explain why the cis isomer reacts much more rapidly than the trans isomer.
43.Cardura
¨,a drug used to treat hypertension,is synthesized as follows:
Identify the intermediate (A),and show the mechanism for its formation. Also,show the mechanism for the conversion of A to B.
Which step do you think will occur most rapidly? Why? (The mechanism for the conversion of B to the final product is explained

in Chapter17.)
BrOHOHCOCH3BrCH2CHCOCH3 ABOOOCH3OHK2CO3KOHOCOHOOOCarduraNH2NH2BrBr(CH
2)n-1(CH2)n-1n =relative rate:31  10142  10373  103101  108510061.7CH3COCH3CH3CH3CH2COCH3CH2OCH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2COCH3CH3OHOCH2CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CHCH
2OCH3CH2CH3CHCH
2CH3BrCH3CH3BrCH3BrBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 435
436CHAPTER 11Elimination 
Reactions of Alkyl Halides ¥ Competition Between Substitution and Elimination44.For each of the following reactions,give the elimination products; if the products can exist as stereoisomers,indicate which
stereoisomers are obtained.a.
b.
c.
d.
e.45.Which of the following hexachlorocyclohexanes is the least reactive in an E2 reaction?
46.The rate of the reaction of 1-bromo-2-butene with ethanol is increased if silver nitrate is added to the reaction mixture. E
xplain.47.For each of the following reactions,carried out under conditions,give the products; if the products can exist as
stereoisomers,show which stereoisomers are formed.
a.c.

b.d.
48.Two elimination products are obtained from the following E2 reaction:
a.What are the elimination products?
b.Which is formed in greater yield? Explain.
49.Three substitution products and three elimination products are obtained from the following reaction:
Account for the formation of these products.50.When the following stereoisomer of 2-chloro-1,3-dimethylcyclohexane reacts with methoxide ion in a solvent that encourages
reactions,only one product is formed:
When the same compound reacts with methoxide ion in a solvent that favors reactions,twelve products are formed. Identify
the products that are formed under the two sets of conditions.
51.For each of the following compounds,give the product that will be formed in an E2 reaction and indicate the configuration of
 theproduct:
a.(1
S,2S)-1-bromo-1,2-diphenylpropaneb.(1
S,2R)-1-bromo-1,2-diphenylpropane
SN1E1CH3CH3HHClHSN2E2H3CCH
3CH3OHBrH3CCH
3OCH3H3COCH
3CCH3CH3OCH3H3CH3CCH
3CH3CCH3CH3CH3HOCH3CH2CHDCH2Br(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3O(3,4)-3-bromo-4-methylhexaneCH3OSN2E2ClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClClCl3-chloro-3-ethyl-2,2-dimethylpentanehigh concentration of CH3CH2O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3O(2,3)-2-chloro-3-methylpentanehigh concentration of CH3OBRUI11-400_436r3  26-03-2003  10:20 AM  Page 436
InChapters10and11,we saw that alkyl
halides undergo substitution and elimina-

tion reactions because of their electron-withdrawing halogen atoms. Compounds with

other electron-withdrawing groups also under-

go substitution and elimination reactions. The

relative reactivity of these compounds depends

on the electron-withdrawing group.
Alcohols and ethers have leaving groups that are stronger bases than
halide ions Alcohols and ethers,therefore,are less reactive than alkyl halides in

substitution and elimination reactions. We will see that because their leaving groups

are strongly basic,alcohols and ethers have to be ÒactivatedÓbefore they can undergo

a substitution or an elimination reaction. In contrast,sulfonates and sulfonium salts

have weakly basic leaving groups so they undergo substitution reactions with ease.
12.1Substitution Reactions of AlcoholsAn alcoholcannot undergo a nucleophilic substitution reaction because it has a strongly
basic leaving group that cannot be displaced by a nucleophile.
An alcohol is able to undergo a nucleophilic substitution reaction if its OH group is
converted into a group that is a weaker base (i.e.,a better leaving group). One way to
CH3OHBr
strong baseCH3BrHO(OH)RXROH
a sulfonium saltan etheran alcoholan alkyl halideX   F, Cl, Br, IROR
a sulfonate esterROS
OORRSR
R(X).(OH, OR)12Reactions of Alcohols,Ethers, Epoxides, 
and Sulfur-Containing

Compounds ¥
Organometallic Compounds437CH3OHCH3OCH3The weaker the base, the more easily it
can be displaced.The stronger the acid, the weaker is its
conjugate base.BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 437
438CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
convert an OH group into a weaker base is to protonate it. Protonation changes the
leaving group from (a strong base) to (a weak base),which is weak enough

to be displaced by a nucleophile. The substitution reaction is slow and requires heat to

take place in a reasonable period of time.
Because the OH group of the alcohol has to be protonated before it can be displaced by
a nucleophile,only weakly basic nucleophiles can be used in the substi-

tution reaction. Moderately and strongly basic nucleophiles 

would be protonated in the acidic solution and,once protonated,would no longer be

nucleophiles or would be poor nucleophiles 
Primary,secondary,and tertiary alcohols all undergo nucleophilic substitution
reactions with HI,HBr,and HCl to form alkyl halides.
The mechanism of the substitution reaction depends on the structure of the alcohol.
Secondary and tertiary alcohols undergo reactions. The carbocation intermediate

formed in the reaction has two possible fates:It can combine with a nucleophile

and form a substitution product,or it can lose a proton and form an elimination

product. However,only the substitution product is actually obtained,because any

alkene formed in an elimination reaction will undergo a subsequent addition reaction

with HX to form more of the substitution product.SN1SN11-propanola primary alcoholcyclohexanola secondary alcoholbromocyclohexane1-iodopropaneCH3CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2IHIOHH2OHBrH2OBr2-methyl-2-butanola tertiary alcohol2-chloro-2-methylbutaneCH3CH2COHCH
3CH2CClHClH2OCH3CH3CH3CH3(CH3OH).RNH3 )(NH4,CH3O)RNH2,(NH3,Cl)Br,(I,CH3OHCH
3BrCH3OHHBr
H2OBrweak baseHH2OOHCH3COHH
HBrCH3CH3H2OCH3COH
CH3CH3CH3CBr
CH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CCH3HBrCH2Brelimination productmechanism of the SN1 reactionsubstitutionproduct  Htert-butyl alcohola tertiary alcoholreaction of the carbocation
with a nucleophileprotonation of the
most basic atomformation of
a carbocationBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 438
Section 12.1Substitution Reactions of Alcohols
439Secondary and tertiary alcohols undergoreactions with hydrogen halides.
SN1Primary alcohols undergo reactions
with hydrogen halides.
SN2Tertiary alcohols undergo substitution reactions with hydrogen halides faster than do
secondary alcohols because tertiary carbocations are easier to form than secondary car-

bocations (Section4.2). Thus,the reaction of a tertiary alcohol with a hydrogen halide

proceeds readily at room temperature,whereas the reaction of a secondary alcohol with

a hydrogen halide would have to be heated to have the reaction occur at the same rate.
Primary alcohols cannot undergo reactions because primary carbocations are
too unstable to be formed (Section11.1). Therefore,when a primary alcohol reacts

with a hydrogen halide,it must do so via an reaction.
Only the substitution product is obtained. No elimination product is formed because
the halide ion,although a good nucleophile,is a weak base,and strong base is needed

in an E2 reaction to remove a proton from a -carbon (Section11.1). (Remember that

a -carbon is the carbon adjacent to the carbon that is attached to the leaving group.)
When HCl is used instead of HBr or HI,the reaction is slower because 
is a poorer nucleophile than or (Section10.3). The rate of the reaction can be

increased by using as a catalyst.
is a Lewis acid that complexes strongly with the lone-pair electrons on oxygen.
This weakens the bond and creates a better leaving group.
ClCH3CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2ClOHZn2ZnZnOHCOZn2ZnCl2CH3CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2ClHClH2OZnCl2IBrClSN2bbethyl alcohola primary alcoholCH3CH2OHCH
3CH2OHCH
3CH2BrHBr
HH2OBrmechanism of the SN2 reactionprotonation ofthe oxygenback-side attack by
the nucleophileSN2SN1CH3CCH2CH3HBrCH3OHCH3CCH2CH3H2OCH3BrCH3CHCH2CH3HBrOHCH3CHCH2CH3H2OBrTHE LUCAS TESTWhether an alcohol is primary,secondary,or ter-
tiary can be determined by taking advantage of
the relative rates at which the three classes of alcohols react

with This is known as the Lucas test. The alcohol

is added to a mixture of HCl and 
Ñthe Lucas reagent.Low-molecular-weight alcohols are soluble in the Lucas

reagent,but the alkyl halide products are not,so the solution
ZnCl2HClZnCl2.turns cloudy as the alkyl halide is formed. When the test is car-
ried out at room temperature,the solution turns cloudy immedi-

ately if the alcohol is tertiary,turns cloudy in about five minutes

if the alcohol is secondary,and remains clear if the alcohol is

primary. Because the test relies on the complete solubility of

the alcohol in the Lucas reagent,it is limited to alcohols with

fewer than six carbons.
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 439
440CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
Howard J. Lucas (1885Ð1963)
was born in Ohio and earned B.S.
and M.S. degrees from Ohio State

University. He published a

description of the Lucas test in 
1930. He was a professor of

chemistry at the California 

Institute of Technology.
PROBLEM 1The observed relative reactivities of primary,secondary,and tertiary alcohols with a

hydrogen halide are If secondary alcohols underwent an reaction

rather than an reaction with a hydrogen halide,what would be the relative reactivities

of the three classes of alcohols?Because the reaction of a secondary or a tertiary alcohol with a hydrogen halide is
an reaction,a carbocation is formed as an intermediate. Therefore,we must check

for the possibility of a carbocation rearrangement when predicting the product of the

substitution reaction. Remember that a carbocation rearrangement will occur if it leads
to formation of a more stable carbocation (Section4.6). For example,the major

product of the reaction of 3-methyl-2-butanol with HBr is 2-bromo-2-methylbutane,

because a 1,2-hydride shift converts the initially formed secondary carbocation into a

more stable tertiary carbocation.PROBLEM 2Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
12.2Amines Do Not Undergo Substitution ReactionsWe have just seen that alcohols are much less reactive than alkyl halides in substitution
reactions. Amines are even less reactive than alcohols. The relative reactivities of 

an alkyl fluoride (the least reactive of the alkyl halides),an alcohol,and an amine can

be appreciated by comparing the values of the conjugate acids of their leaving
paCHCH3CH3OHHClOHCH3HClCH3CCHCH
3CH3OHCH3HBrCH3CH2CHCH3OHHBrSN1SN1SN23¡2¡1¡.H2OBrsecondary carbocationtertiary carbocation
CH3CHCHCH3OHOHHCH3CHCHCH3CH3CH3CHCHCH3CH3CHCHCH3HBrBrCH3CH3CH3CH3BrBrCH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3CCH2CH33-methyl-2-butanol2-bromo-3-methyl-butaneminor product1,2-hydrideshift2-bromo-2-methyl-butanemajor productBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 440
Section 12.2Amines Do Not Undergo Substitution Reactions
441GRAIN ALCOHOL AND WOOD ALCOHOLWhen ethanol is ingested,it acts on the central ner-
vous system. Ingesting moderate amounts of ethanol affects

oneÕs judgment and lowers one
Õs inhibitions. Higher concentra-tions interfere with motor coordination and cause slurred speech
and amnesia. Still higher concentrations cause nausea and loss
of consciousness. Ingesting very large amounts of ethanol inter-

feres with spontaneous respiration and can be fatal.
The ethanol in alcoholic beverages is produced by the fermen-
tation of glucose,obtained from grapes and from grains such as

corn,rye,and wheat,which is why ethanol is also known as grain

alcohol. Grains are cooked in the presence of malt (sprouted

barley) to convert much of their starch into glucose. Yeast is

added to convert glucose into ethanol and carbon dioxide.
glucoseethanol
yeast enzymesC6H12O62  CH3CH2OH2  CO
2The kind of beverage produced (white or red wine,beer,scotch,
bourbon,champagne) depends on the plant species being

fermented,whether the that is formed is allowed to escape,

whether other substances are added,and how the beverage is

purified (by sedimentation for wines,by distillation for scotch

and bourbon).The tax on liquor would make ethanol a prohibitively
expensive laboratory reagent. Because ethanol is needed in a

wide variety of commercial processes,however,laboratory

alcohol is not taxed,but it is carefully regulated by the federal

government to make certain that it is not used for the prepara-

tion of alcoholic beverages. Denatured alcohol
Ñethanol that
has been made undrinkable by adding a denaturant such as

benzene or methanolÑis not taxed,but the added impurities
make it unfit for many laboratory uses.
Methanol,also known as wood alcohol because at one time
it was obtained by heating wood in the absence of oxygen,is

highly toxic. Ingesting even very small amounts can cause

blindness. Ingesting as little as an ounce has been fatal. The

antidote to methanol poisoning is discussed in Section20.11.
CO2groups (recalling that the weaker the acid,the stronger is its conjugate base). The
leaving group of an amine is such a strong base that amines cannot undergo

substitution or elimination reactions.Protonation of the amino group makes it a better leaving group,but not nearly as
good a leaving group as a protonated alcohol,which is units more acidic than

a protonated amine.Therefore,unlike the leaving group of a protonated alcohol,the leaving group of a
protonated amine cannot dissociate to form a carbocation or be replaced by a halide

ion. Protonated amino groups also cannot be displaced by strongly basic nucleophiles

such as because the nucleophile would react immediately with the acidic hydro-

gen of the group and thereby be converted to water,a poor nucleophile.
PROBLEM 3Why can a halide ion such as react with a protonated primary alcohol,but not with a
protonated primary amine?BrCH3CH2NH3HOCH3CH2NH2H2ONH3HOCH3CH2OH2pKa  2.4p
Ka  11.2CH3CH2NH313 paHFpKa  3.2p
Ka  15.7p
Ka  36RCH2Frelative reactivitiesH2ORCH2OHNH3RCH2NH2(NH2)BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 441
442CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
3-D Molecules:Thionyl chloride;
Pyridine;
Pyridinium ion1Because of its instability,is generated in situ (in the reaction mixture) from the reaction of
phosphorus with iodine.PI312.3Other Methods for Converting Alcoholsinto Alkyl HalidesAlcohols are inexpensive and readily available compounds. As we have just seen,they
do not undergo nucleophilic substitution because the group is too basic to be dis-

placed by a nucleophile. Chemists,therefore,need ways to convert readily available

but unreactive alcohols into reactive alkyl halides that can be used as starting materials

for the preparation of many organic compounds (Section10.4).
We have just seen that an alcohol can be converted into an alkyl halide by treating it
with a hydrogen halide. However,better yields are obtained and carbocation

rearrangements can be avoided if a phosphorus trihalide 
1orthionyl chloride is used instead. These reagents all act in the same way:They

convert an alcohol into an alkyl halide by converting the alcohol into an intermediate

with a leaving group that is readily displaced by a halide ion. For example,phosphorus

tribromide converts the OH group of an alcohol into a bromophosphite group that can

be readily displaced by a bromide ion.Thionyl chloride converts an OH group into a chlorosulfite group that can be
displaced by Pyridineis generally used as the solvent in these reactions because it prevents the
buildup of HBr or HCl and it is a relatively poor nucleophile.
pyridineHClNClNHCl.(SOCl2)or PI3)PBr3,(PCl3,ROHRXRNu
NuHXalkyl halideX  Cl, Br, IalcoholOHCH3CH2OHCH
3CH2OPBr2OPBr2NNHPBr
BrBrCH3CH2CH3CH2BrOPBr2BrphosphorustribromideHa bromophosphite
groupCH3OHClSO2NNHSCl
ClCH3ClClthionylchlorideHa chlorosulfite
groupOSOCl
CH3OSOCl
CH3OBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 442
Section 12.4Converting Alcohols into Sulfonate Esters
443Table 12.1   Commonly Used Methods for Converting Alcohols into Alkyl
HalidesROHHBrRBr
ROHHIRI
ROHHClRCl
ROHPBr
3RBrROHPCl
3RClROHSOCl
2RClpyridinepyridinepyridineThe foregoing reactions work well for primary and secondary alcohols,but tertiary
alcohols give poor yields because the intermediate formed by a tertiary alcohol is

sterically hindered to attack by the halide ion.Table12.1summarizes some of the commonly used methods for converting alco-
hols into alkyl halides.
12.4Converting Alcohols into Sulfonate EstersAnother way an alcohol can be activated for subsequent reaction with a nucleophile,be-
sides being converted into an alkyl halide,is to be converted into a sulfonate ester. A

sulfonate ester
is formed when an alcohol reacts with a sulfonyl chloride.
The reaction is a nucleophilic substitution reaction. The alcohol displaces the chloride
ion. Pyridine is used both as the solvent and to prevent HCl from building up.
A sulfonic acid is a strong acid because its conjugate base is particu-
larly stable due to delocalization of its negative charge over three oxygen atoms.

(Recall from Section7.6that electron delocalization stabilizes a charged species.)

Since a sulfonic acid is a strong acid,its conjugate base is weak,giving the sulfonate

ester an excellent leaving group. (Notice that sulfur has an expanded valence shell
Ñitis surrounded by 12 electrons.)resonance contributorsRSOH
OORSOORSO
ORSOH
OOOOpa1ClSOROONHRSOROORNHSClOORROHRSOOClROH
pyridinea sulfonyl chloridea sulfonate ester
pyridineRSOOORCl
ÐHBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:50 AM  Page 443
Several sulfonyl chlorides are available to activate OH groups. The most common one
is para
-toluenesulfonyl chloride.
Once the alcohol has been activated by being converted into a sulfonate ester,the
appropriate nucleophile is added,generally under conditions that favor reactions.

The reactions take place readily at room temperature because the leaving group is so

good. For example,a 
para
-toluenesulfonate ion is about 100 times better than a chlo-ride ion as a leaving group. Sulfonate esters react with a wide variety of nucleophiles,

so they can be used to synthesize a wide variety of compounds.
para
-Toluenesulfonyl chloride is called tosyl chloride and is abbreviated TsCl; the
product of the reaction of para
-toluenesulfonyl chloride and an alcohol is called an
alkyl tosylate
and is abbreviated ROTs. The leaving group,therefore,is The
product of the reaction of trifluoromethanesulfonyl chloride and an alcohol is called

an alkyl triflate
and is abbreviated ROTf.
PROBLEM 4SOLVED
Explain why the ether obtained by treating an optically active alcohol with followed
by sodium methoxide has the same configuration as the alcohol,whereas the ether

obtained by treating the alcohol with tosyl chloride followed by sodium methoxide has a

configuration opposite that of the alcohol.
SOLUTIONConversion of the alcohol to the ether via the alkyl halide involves two
successive reactions:(1)attack of on the bromophosphite and (2)attack of
on the alkyl halide. Each reaction takes place with inversion of configura-
tion,so the final product has the same configuration as the starting material. In contrast,
SN2CH3OBrSN2HROHCH3HROCH3CH31. PBr3/pyridine2. CH3OHROHCH3HRCH3OCH31. TsCl/pyridine2. CH3OPBr3an alkyl tosylateNCCH3CH2CH2OTsOTsNCH3CH2CH2Can alkyl triflateCH3NH2CH3CH2CH2OTfOTfCH3CH2CH2NH2CH3OTs.SN2para-toluenesulfonylchloridemethanesulfonylchlorideH3CSCl
OOSCl
OOH3CtrifluoromethanesulfonylchlorideSCl
OOF3C444CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
Tutorial:
Leaving groups3-D Molecules:Methanesulfonyl chloride;
Methanesulfonate
methyl esterOTsCH3SCH
3CH2CH2CH2SOOOCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2SCH3SOOOCH3CNN
CH3CH2CH2SOOOCH3CH3CH2CH2CSOOOCH3OTsROTsROTsBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 444
conversion of the alcohol to the ether via the alkyl tosylate involves only one 
reaction:attack of on the alkyl tosylate. Therefore,the final product and the

starting material have opposite configurations.
PROBLEM 5Show how 1-butanol can be converted into the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
12.5Elimination Reactions of Alcohols: DehydrationAn alcohol can undergo an elimination reaction,forming an alkene by losing an OH
from one carbon and an H from an adjacent carbon. Overall,this amounts to the elim-

ination of a molecule of water. Loss of water from a molecule is called 
dehydration
.Dehydration of an alcohol requires an acid catalyst and heat. Sulfuric acid 

and phosphoric acid are the most commonly used acid catalysts.
An acid always reacts with an organic molecule in the same way:It protonates the
most basic (electron-rich) atom in the molecule. Thus,in the first step of the dehydra-

tion reaction,the acid protonates the oxygen atom of the alcohol. As we saw earlier,

protonation converts the very poor leaving group into a good leaving group
In the next step,water departs,leaving behind a carbocation. A base in the
reaction mixture (water is the base in highest concentration) removes a proton from a
-carbon (a carbon adjacent to the positively charged carbon),forming an alkene and
regenerating the acid catalyst. Notice that the dehydration reaction is an E1 reaction of

a protonated alcohol.b(H2O).(OH)OHCH3CH2CHCH3CH3CHCHCH
3H2OH2SO4(H3PO4)(H2SO4)CH3CH2CH2CH2CNCH3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2SHOCH3CH2CH2CH2OCCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2NHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3OSN2Section 12.5Elimination Reactions of Alcohols: Dehydration
445An acid protonates the most basic atom
in a molecule.OHCH3CHCH3OHHCH3CHCH3CH2HCH
2CHCH3CHCH3HOSO
3HOSO3HH2OH3Omechanism of dehydration (E1)formation ofa carbocationprotonation of the
most basic atoma base removes a
proton from a -carbonHROHCH3HBrRCH3HROPBr3CH3HROCH3CH3PBr3pyridineBrHROHCH3HCH3ORCH3HROTsCH3TsClpyridineCH3OCH3OBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 445
In Section4.5,we saw that an alkene is hydrated (adds water) in the presence of an
acid catalyst,thereby forming an alcohol. The hydration of an alkene is the reverse of

the acid-catalyzed dehydration of an alcohol.To prevent the alkene formed in the dehydration reaction from adding water and
reforming the alcohol,the alkene can be removed by distillation as it is formed,

because it has a much lower boiling point than the alcohol. Removing a product

displaces the reaction to the right. (See Le Ch›telierÕs principle,Section10.4.)
PROBLEM 6Explain why the acid-catalyzed dehydration of an alcohol is a reversible reaction,whereas
the base-promoted dehydrohalogenation of an alkyl halide is an irreversible reaction.
Because the rate-determining step in the dehydration of a secondary or a tertiary
alcohol is formation of a carbocation intermediate,the rate of dehydration parallels the

ease with which the carbocation is formed. Tertiary alcohols are the easiest to dehydrate

because tertiary carbocations are more stable and therefore are easier to form than

secondary and primary carbocations (Section4.2). In order to undergo dehydration,

tertiary alcohols must be heated to about 50
¡C in 5% secondary alcohols must
be heated to about 100
¡C in 75% and primary alcohols can be dehydrated only
under extreme conditions (170
¡C in 95% ) and by a different mechanism
because primary carbocations are too unstable to be formed (Section10.5).
H2SO4H2SO4,H2SO4,dehydrationhydrationRCH2CHRRCHCHRH
2OOHHH446CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
Carbocation stability: 3¡2¡1¡Whenmore than one elimination product can be formed,the major product is the
more substituted alkene
Ñthe one obtained by removing a proton from the -carbon
that is bonded to the fewest hydrogens. (Recall Zaitsev
Õs rule,Section11.2.) The more
substituted alkene is the major product because it is the more stable alkene,so it has

the more stable transition state leading to its formation (Figure12.1).
H3PO4CH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3H3CCH3CH2OHCH2CCH2CH3CH3OHH2OH2OH2SO484%93%7%
16%bMovie:DehydrationFree energyProgress of the reactionCH3CCH2RCH3CH3CCH2RCH3CH2CCH2R  H3OCH3CH3CCHR  H3OCH3OHH2OHFigure 12.1
The reaction coordinate diagramfor the dehydration of a
protonated alcohol. The major
product is the more substituted
alkene because the transition state
leading to its formation is more
stable, allowing it to be formed
more rapidly.
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 446
Dehydration of secondary and tertiary alcohols involves the formation of a carbocation
intermediate,so be sure to check the structure of the carbocation for the possibility of

rearrangement. Remember that a carbocation will rearrange if rearrangement produces a

more stable carbocation (Section4.6). For example,the intitially formed secondary

carbocation in the following reaction rearranges to a more stable tertiary carbocation:
The followingis an example of a 
ring-expansion rearrangement
. Both theinitially formed carbocation and the carbocation to which it rearranges are secondary

carbocations,but the initially formed carbocation is less stable because of the strain in

its four-membered ring (Section2.11). Rearrangement relieves this strain. The

rearranged secondary carbocation can rearrange by a 1,2-hydride shift to an even more

stable tertiary carbocation. (is any base present in the solution.)
PROBLEM 7What product would be formed if the preceding alcohol were heated with an equivalent
amount of HBr rather than with a catalytic amount of PROBLEM 8List the following alcohols in order of decreasing rate of dehydration in the presence

of acid:OHOHCH2OHCH3CH3H2SO4  ?BRCOHRRCHOHRCH
2OHRRrelative ease of dehydrationa tertiary alcohola secondary alcohola primary alcohol
increasing ease of dehydrationSection 12.5Elimination Reactions of Alcohols: Dehydration
447Tutorial:
Carbocation rearrangementssecondary carbocationH3PO4CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3CH3CCHCH
3CH3CH3        H2OCH3CCHCH
2CH3CH3CH3CCCH
3CH3CH3CH2CCHCH3CH3CH3OHtertiary carbocationCH3CCHCH
3CH3CH33,3-dimethyl-2-butanol1,2-methylshift3,3-dimethyl-1-butene3%2,3-dimethyl-2-butene64%2,3-dimethyl-1-butene33%HHH2SO4ring-expansionrearrangementrearrangementsecondarycarbocationtertiarycarbocationCHCH3CH3HBCH
3CH3HBH2OCHOHCH3BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 447
448CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
While the dehydration of a tertiary or a secondary alcohol is an E1 reaction,the de-
hydration of a primary alcohol is an E2 reaction because of the difficulty encountered

in forming primary carbocations. Any base () in the reaction mixture (ROH,
can remove the proton in the elimination reaction. An ether is also obtained as
the product of a competing reaction.
PROBLEM 9Heating an alcohol with sulfuric acid is a good way to prepare a symmetrical ether such as
diethyl ether. It is not a good method for preparing an unsymmetrical ether such as ethyl

propyl ether.
a.Explain.
b.How would you synthesize ethyl propyl ether?
Although the dehydration of a primary alcohol is an E2 reaction and therefore does
not form a carbocation intermediate,the product obtained in most cases is identical to

the product that would be obtained if a carbocation had been formed in an E1 reaction

and then had rearranged. For example,we would expect 1-butene to be the product of

the E2 dehydration of 1-butanol. However,we find that the product is actually

2-butene,which would have been the product if an E1 reaction had occurred and the

initially formed primary carbocation intermediate had rearranged to a more stable

secondary carbocation. 2-Butene is the product of the reaction,not because an E1

reaction occurred,but because,after the E2 product (1-butene) is formed,a proton

from the acidic solution adds to the double bondÑadding to the carbon bonded to
the greater number of hydrogens (in accordance with Markovnikov
Õs rule) to form a
carbocation. Loss of a proton from the carbocation
Ñfrom the -carbon bonded to the
fewest hydrogens (in accordance with Zaitsev
Õs rule)Ñgives 2-butene,the final
product of the reaction.The stereochemical outcome of the E1 dehydration of an alcohol is identical to the
stereochemical outcome of the E1 dehydrohalogenation of an alkyl halide. That is,

both the Eand Zisomers are obtained as products. More of the isomer with the bulky
bsp2SN2HSO4 )H2O,BCH3CH2OHHOSO
3HHHCH2CH2CH2CH2OHBBH2OHBOSO3HHBmechanism of dehydration (E2) and competing substitution (SN2)E2elimination productSN2substitution productHCH3CH2CH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3CH2OCH2CH3OHCH3CH2OHHprotonation of themost basic atomremoval of a proton
from a -carbonback-side attack bythe nucleophilePrimary alcohols undergo dehydrationby an E2 pathway.
Secondary and tertiary alcohols undergodehydration by an E1 pathway.
HCH3CH2CHCH3   HCH3CH2CH2CH2OH1-butanolCH3CH2CHCH
2   H2O   1-buteneCH3CHCHCH
32-buteneH2SO4BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 448
Section 12.5Elimination Reactions of Alcohols: Dehydration
449groups on opposite sides of the double bond is produced because it is formed more
rapidly since,being the more stable isomer,the transition state leading to its formation

is more stable (Section11.5).
The relatively harsh conditions (acid and heat) required for alcohol dehydration and
the structural changes resulting from carbocation rearrangements may result in low

yields of the desired alkene. Dehydration,however,can be carried out under milder

conditions by using phosphorus oxychloride and pyridine.
Reaction with converts the OH group of the alcohol into a good
leaving group. The basic reaction conditions favor an E2 reaction,so a carbocation is

not formed and carbocation rearrangements do not occur. Pyridine serves as a base to

remove the proton in the elimination reaction and to prevent the buildup of HC1,

which would add to the alkene.
OPOCl2,POCl3OHPOCl3pyridine, 0 CCH3CH2CHCH3CH3CHCHCH
3(POCl3)OHH2SO4CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CHHCH
3CCH3CCH
3HHCCH3CH2CHCH
2    H
    H
2O2-butanoltrans-2-butene74%cis-2-butene23%1-butene3%CH3CHHClCl
POCH3ONCH3CHClClClPOHCH3OCH2HCHClCl
POCH3OOPOCl22ClCH2CHCH3NHNphosphorusoxychlorideBIOLOGICAL DEHYDRATIONS
Dehydration reactions are known to occur in
many important biological processes. Instead of
being catalyzed by strong acids,which would not be available

to a cell,they are catalyzed by enzymes. Fumarase,for exam-

ple,is an enzyme that catalyzes the dehydration of malate in the
citric acid cycle (p.1038). The citric acid cycle is a series of
reactions that oxidize compounds derived from carbohydrates,

fatty acids,and amino acids.
Enolase,another enzyme,catalyzes the dehydration of -phos-
phoglycerate in glycolysis (p.1037). Glycolysis is a series of reac-

tions that prepare glucose for entry into the citric acid cycle.
aphosphoenolpyruvate-phosphoglycerateenolaseOOCOCCCH2CH2CHOOPO32OPO32OHH2OfumaratemalatefumaraseOOCOOOOCCCCHHCCH2CHOOOHH2OBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 449
PROBLEM 10What alcohol would you treat with phosphorus oxychloride and pyridine to form each of
the following alkenes?
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
Even the most complicated-looking mechanism can be worked out if you proceed one step
at a time,keeping in mind the structure of the final product. The oxygen is the only basic

atom in the starting material,so that is where protonation occurs. Loss of water forms a

tertiary carbocation.Because the starting material contains a seven-membered ring and the final product has a
six-membered ring,a ring-contraction rearrangement must occur. When doing a 
ring-contraction
(or a ring-expansion) 
rearrangement
,it can be helpful to label the equivalent
carbons in the reactant and product. Of the two possible pathways for ring contraction,one

leads to a tertiary carbocation and the other leads to a primary carbocation. The correct path-

way must be the one that leads to the tertiary carbocation,since it has the same arrangement

of atoms as the product,and the primary carbocation would be too unstable to form.
The final product can now be obtained by removing a proton from the rearranged carbocation.
Now continue on to Problem 11.
H2O21CH3CH21CH3H3CH3CCH22HH3O21CH3H3CCH3212121CH2tertiary carbocationprimary carbocationCH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CH3CCH3CH3OHHH3CCH3CH3H2OOHHCH3CH3CH3CH2H3CH3CCH3CHCHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2CCH2 a.b.d.
c.450CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 450
PROBLEM 11Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.PROBLEM 12Give the major product formed when each of the following alcohols is heated in the
presence of a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
12.6Substitution Reactions of EthersThe group of an 
etherand the group of an alcohol have nearly the same
basicity,since their conjugate acids have similar values. (The of is

15.5 and the of is 15.7.) Both groups are strong bases,so both are very poor

leaving groups. Consequently,alcohols and ethers are equally unreactive toward

nucleophilic substitution.Many of the reagents that are used to activate alcohols toward nucleophilic substitution
(e.g.,cannot be used to activate ethers. When an alcohol reacts with an

activating agent such as a sulfonyl chloride,a proton dissociates from the intermediate in

the second step of the reaction and a stable sulfonate ester results.SOCl2, PCl3)an alcoholROH
an etherROR
H2OpaCH3OHpapaOHORCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OHOHCH3CH2CHCCH
3CH3OHCH
3CHCH2CH3OHCH2OHCH3CH2CCHCH
3CH3OHCH
3H2SO4  :OHHBrBrCH3CH3CH3CH3H2SO4OCH2OHOCH3H2SO4CH3CH3OHCH3CH3Section 12.6Substitution Reactions of Ethers
451BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 451
452CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
When an ether reacts with a sulfonyl chloride,however,the oxygen atom does not have
a proton that can dissociate. The alkyl group (R) cannot dissociate,so a stable sulfonate

ester cannot be formed. Instead,the more stable starting materials are reformed.
However,like alcohols,ethers can be activated by protonation. Ethers,therefore,
can undergo nucleophilic substitution reactions with HBr or HI. As with alcohols,the

reaction of ethers with hydrogen halides is slow,and the reaction mixture must be

heated in order for the reaction to occur at a reasonable rate.The first step in the cleavage of an ether by HI or HBr is protonation of the ether
oxygen. This converts the very basic leaving group into the less basic ROH leaving

group. What happens next in the mechanism depends on the structure of the ether.
If departure of the leaving group creates a relatively stable carbocation (e.g.,a tertiary
carbocation),an reaction occurs
Ñthe leaving group departs,and the halide ion
combines with the carbocation.However,if departure of the leaving group would create an unstable carbocation 
(e.g.,a methyl,vinyl,aryl,or primary carbocation),the leaving group cannot depart. It

has to be displaced by the halide ion. In other words,an reaction occurs. The

halide ion preferentially attacks the less sterically hindered of the two alkyl groups.
The cleavage of ethers by HI or HBr occurs more rapidly if the reaction can take
place by an pathway. If the instability of the carbocation requires the reaction to

follow an pathway,cleavage will be more rapid with HI than with HBr because I
SN2SN1SN2SN1RORORRORRIROHHIHIClCl
SOORRORS
OORORRan etherSOORROHClS
OOROHRSHOOROR
an alcohola sulfonate esterClSN1IHCH3COCH
3CH3CH3CH3COCH
3HCH3CH3CH3CICH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3OHCH3protonationcarbocationformationattack by a nucleophileISN2HHCH3OCH2CH2CH3OCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3ICH3CH2CH2OHprotonation nucleophile attacks the lesssterically hindered carbonBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 452
Section 12.6Substitution Reactions of Ethers
453Table 12.2
Some Ethers That Are Used as Solvents
CH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3OCH2CH2OCH3CH3OC(CH3)3OOOdiethyl ether"ether"tetrahydrofuranTHF1,4-dioxane1,2-dimethoxyethane
DMEtert-butyl methyl etherMTBEtetrahydropyranOAmputation of a legwithout anesthetic in 1528.is a better nucleophile than Only a substitution product is obtained because the
bases present in the reaction mixture (halide ions and ) are too weak to abstract a

proton in an E2 reaction,and any alkene formed in an E1 reaction would undergo

electrophilic addition with HBr or HI to form the same alkyl halide as would be

obtained from the substitution reaction. Concentrated HCl cannot cleave ethers

because is too poor a nucleophile.
Because the only reagents with which ethers react are hydrogen halides,ethers are
frequently used as solvents. Some common ether solvents are shown in Table12.2.
ClH2OBr.3-D Molecules:Diethyl ether; 
Tetrahydrofuran
PROBLEM 13Explain why methyl propyl ether forms both methyl iodide and propyl iodide when it is
heated with excess HI.
PROBLEM 14Can HF be used to cleave ethers? Explain.
ANESTHETICSBecause diethyl ether (commonly known simply as ether) is a short-lived muscle

relaxant,it has been widely used as an inhalation anesthetic. However,because it
takes effect slowly and has a slow and unpleasant recovery period,other compounds,such as

enflurane,isoflurane,and halothane,have replaced ether as an anesthetic. Diethyl ether is still

used where there is a lack of trained anesthesiologists,since it is the safest anesthetic to administer

by untrained hands. Anesthetics interact with the nonpolar molecules of cell membranes,causing

the membranes to swell,which interferes with their permeability.
Sodium pentothal (also called thiopental sodium) is commonly used as an intravenous anesthetic.
The onset of anesthesia and the loss of consciousness occur within seconds of its administration.

Care must be taken when administering sodium pentothal because the dose for effective anesthesia

is 75% of the lethal dose. Because of its toxicity,it cannot be used as the sole anesthetic. It is

generally used to induce anesthesia before an inhalation anesthetic is administered. Propofol is an

anesthetic that has all the properties of the Òperfect anestheticÓ:It can be used as the sole anesthetic
by intravenous drip,it has a rapid and pleasant induction period and a wide margin of safety,and

recovery from the drug is rapid and pleasant.
sodium pentothalpropofol
CH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CH3CH3NNHOOSNaCHCH3CH3CH3CHOH"ether"CH3CH2OCH2CH3isofluraneCF3CHClOCHF2enfluraneCHClFCF2OCHF2halothaneCF3CHClBrAlcohols and ethers undergo SN2/E2reactions unless they would have to

form a primary carbocation, in which
case they undergo SN1/E1 reactions.
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 453
454CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
PROBLEM 15SOLVED
Give the major products that would be obtained from heating each of the following ethers
with HI:SOLUTION TO 15a
The reaction takes place by an pathway because neither alkyl
group will form a relatively stable carbocation. Iodide ion attacks the carbon of the ethyl

group because the other possibility is to attack an hybridized carbon,and carbons

are generally not attacked by nucleophiles (Section10.8). Thus,the products are ethyl

iodide and an enol that immediately rearranges to an aldehyde (Section6.6).
12.7Reactions of EpoxidesEthers in which the oxygen atom is incorporated into a three-membered ring are called
epoxidesor oxiranes. The common name of an epoxide uses the common name of the
alkene,followed by 
Òoxide,Óassuming that the oxygen atom is where the bond of an
alkene would be. The simplest epoxide is ethylene oxide.
There are two systematic ways to name epoxides. One method calls the three-
membered oxygen-containing ring Òoxirane,Ówith oxygen occupying the 1-position
of the ring. Thus,2-ethyloxirane has an ethyl substituent at the 2-position of the

oxirane ring. Alternatively,an epoxide can be named as an alkane,with an 
ÒepoxyÓprefix that identifies the carbons to which the oxygen is attached.
PROBLEM 16Draw the structure of the following compounds:
a.2-propyloxiranec.2,2,3,3-tetramethyloxirane
b.cyclohexene oxided.2,3-epoxy-2-methylpentane
2-ethyloxirane1,2-epoxybutaneH2CCHCH
2CH32,3-dimethyloxirane2,3-epoxybutaneCH3CHCHCH
32,2-dimethyloxirane1,2-epoxy-2-methylpropaneH2CCH3CH3COOOethyleneH2CCH
2ethylene oxideH2CCH
2propyleneH2CCHCH
3propylene oxideH2COCHCH3Opsp2sp2SN2CHOCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2OCH2CH3CHCH2OOCH3CH3CH3OOa.b.c.d.e.f.IHIHCH3CH2IOCH
2CH3CHCH3CHOCH3CH2CHOHCHCH3CHOCH
2CH3CHCH3CHBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 454
Section 12.7Reactions of Epoxides
455Free energyProgress of the reactionGàGà25 kcal/molethylene oxidediethyl ether(105 kJ/mol)Figure 12.2
The reaction coordinate diagramsfor nucleophilic attack of hydroxide
ion on ethylene oxide and on
diethyl ether. The greater reactivity

of the epoxide is a result of the
strain (ring strain and torsional
strain) in the three-membered ring,
which increases its free energy.
Although an epoxide and an ether have the same leaving group,epoxides are much
more reactive than ethers in nucleophilic substitution reactions because the strain in

the three-membered ring is relieved when the ring opens (Figure12.2). Epoxides,

therefore,readily undergo ring-opening reactions with a wide variety of nucleophiles.
Epoxides,like other ethers,react with hydrogen halides. In the first step of the re-
action,the nucleophilic oxygen is protonated by the acid. The protonated epoxide is

then attacked by the halide ion. Because epoxides are so much more reactive than

ethers,the reaction takes place readily at room temperature. (Recall that the reaction

of an ether with a hydrogen halide requires heat.)Protonated epoxides are so reactive that they can be opened by poor nucleophiles,such
as and alcohols. (is any acid in the reaction mixture; is any base.)
If different substituents are attached to the two carbons of the protonated epoxide
(and the nucleophile is something other than ),the product obtained from

nucleophilic attack on the 2-position of the oxirane ring will be different from that

obtained from nucleophilic attack on the 3-position. The major product is the one

resulting from nucleophilic attack on the more substituted
carbon.H2OBHBH2OHBr
H2CCH
2CH2HOCH2CH2BrBrH2CHOOprotonation of the epoxide oxygen atomback-side attack
by the nucleophileH2OH2CCH
2CH2CH2CH2OHOHHHOCH2CH2OHH2COHBBHB1,2-ethanediolethylene glycolCH3OHCH3CHCHCH
3CH3CHCHCH3OCH3OHHCH3CHCHCH3HBCH3CHCHCH
3HBOH  OCH3OH3-methoxy-2-butanolOBHOBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 455
456CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
The moresubstituted carbon is more likely to be attacked because,after the epoxide
is protonated,it is so reactive that one of the bonds begins to break before the

nucleophile has a chance to attack. As the bond starts to break,a partial positive

charge develops on the carbon that is losing its share of the oxygen
Õs electrons. The
protonated epoxide breaks preferentially in the direction that puts the partial positive

charge on the more substituted carbon,because a more substituted carbocation is more

stable. (Recall that tertiary carbocations are more stable than secondary carbocations,
which are more stable than primary carbocations.)The best way to describe the reaction is to say that it occurs by a pathway that is
partially and partially It is not a pure reaction because a carbocation

intermediate is not fully formed; it is not a pure reaction because the leaving

group begins to depart before the compound is attacked by the nucleophile.
In Section12.6,we saw that an ether does not undergo a nucleophilic substitution
reaction unless the very basic leaving group is converted by protonation into a

less basic ROH group. Because of the strain in the three-membered ring,epoxides are

reactive enough to open without first being protonated. When a nucleophile attacks an

unprotonated epoxide,the reaction is a pure reaction. That is,the bond

does not begin to break until the carbon is attacked by the nucleophile. In this case,the

nucleophile is more likely to attack the 
less substitutedcarbon because the less sub-stituted carbon is more accessible to attack. (It is less sterically hindered.) Thus,the

site of nucleophilic attack on an unsymmetrical epoxide under neutral or basic condi-

tions (when the epoxide is not
protonated) is different from the site of nucleophilic
attack under acidic conditions (when the epoxide isprotonated).After the nucleophile has attacked the epoxide,the alkoxide ion can pick up a proton
from the solvent or from an acid added after the reaction is over.
site of nucleophilic attackunder acidic conditionssite of nucleophilic attackunder basic conditionsCH3CHCH
2OCOSN2ORSN2SN1SN2.SN1COCO3-D Molecule:Propylene oxideCH3OHHCH3CHOCH2HCH3CHCH2OHOCH3CH3CHCH
2OHCH3CHCH2OCH3OH2-methoxy-1-propanolmajor product1-methoxy-2-propanolminor productmajor productminor productCH3CHCH
2OHCH3CHCH2OHOCH3HCH3CHCH2OHOCH3CH3CHCH
2OHCH3CHCH2OCH3HOHCH3CHCH2OCH3OHCH3CHCH
2OHCH3OHCH3OHdeveloping secondary carbocationdeveloping primary carbocation      H      HCH3OHorHCH3CHCH2OCH3OCH3CHCH
2OCH3CHCH2OCH3OHCH3OCH3OBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 456
Section 12.8Arene Oxides
457Epoxides are synthetically useful reagents because they can react with a wide variety
of nucleophiles,leading to the formation of a wide variety of products.
Epoxides also are important in biological processes because they are reactive
enough to be attacked by nucleophiles under the conditions found in living systems

(Section12.8).
Notice that the reaction of cyclohexene oxide with a nucleophile leads to trans
products because an reaction involves back-side nucleophilic attack.
PROBLEM 17Why does the preceding reaction form two stereoisomers?
PROBLEM 18Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 19Would you expect the reactivity of a five-membered ring ether such as tetrahydrofuran
(Table12.2) to be more similar to an epoxide or to a noncyclic ether?
12.8Arene Oxides
When an aromatic hydrocarbon such as benzene is ingested or inhaled,it is enzymati-
cally converted into an 
arene oxide
. An arene oxide
is a compound in which one of the
Òdouble bonds
Óof the aromatic ring has been converted into an epoxide. Formation of
an arene oxide is the first step in changing an aromatic compound that enters the body

as a foreign substance (e.g.,cigarette smoke,drugs,automobile exhaust) into a more

water-soluble compound that can eventually be eliminated. The enzyme that detoxifies

aromatic hydrocarbons by converting them into arene oxides is called cytochrome P
450.CH3OCH3OHHCH3CCH3CH3OCCH3OCH3OHH2CCH3CH3OCHCH3CHCH3OHCH3CH3OCH2CCH3CH3OCHCH3OHSN2CH3CHCH2NH2CH3OCH3CHCH
2OCH3CHCH2NHCH3OHCH3NH2HH2CCH
3CCH3CH3CH3CCH3COCCH2CCH3CH3CH3COHCCH2CCH3OCHCNCONCOHNOHCNOOCNBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 457
458CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
Arene oxides are important intermediates in the biosynthesis of biochemically
important phenols such as tyrosine and serotonin.An arene oxide can react in two different ways. It can react as a typical epoxide,
undergoing attack by a nucleophile to form an addition product (Section12.7).

Alternatively,it can rearrange to form a phenol,something that epoxides such as

ethylene oxide cannot do.When an arene oxide reacts with a nucleophile,the three-membered ring undergoes
back-side nucleophilic attack,forming an addition product.
When an arene oxide undergoes rearrangement,the three-membered epoxide ring
opens,picking up a proton from a species in the solution. Instead of immediately losing

a proton to form phenol,the carbocation forms an 
enoneas a result of a 1,2-hydride
shift. This is called an 
NIH shiftbecause it was first observed in a laboratory at the
National Institutes of Health. Removal of a proton from the enone forms phenol.
OBNIH shiftHBH   H   HBHOHOHHHOHObenzene oxidea carbocationan enonephenol
OHOHO
OH2OOHaddition productOHOHaddition productYrearranged productOHOHYOtyrosinean amino acidCH2CHCOONH3HOserotonina vasoconstrictorNHCH2CH2NH2HOcytochrome P450O2benzene oxidean arene oxidebenzeneO3-D Molecule:Benzene oxidebenzenebenzene oxideBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 458
Section 12.8Arene Oxides
459Because the first step is rate-determining,the rate of formation of phenol depends on
the stability of the carbocation. The more stable the carbocation,the easier it is to open

the epoxide ring and form the phenol.Only one arene oxide can be formed from naphthalene because the 
Òdouble bond
Óshared by the two rings cannot be epoxidized. Recall from Section7.11that benzene

rings are particularly stable,so it is much easier to epoxidize a position that will leave

one of the benzene rings intact. Naphthalene oxide can rearrange to form either

1-naphthol or 2-naphthol. The carbocation leading to 1-naphthol is more stable

because its positive charge can be stabilized by electron delocalization without

destroying the aromaticity of the benzene ring on the left of the structure. In contrast,

the positive charge on the carbocation leading to 2-naphthol can be stabilized by

electron delocalization only if the aromaticity of the benzene ring is destroyed.

Consequently,rearrangement leads predominantly to 1-naphthol.
PROBLEM 20Draw all possible resonance contributors for the two carbocations in the preceding reaction.
Use the resonance contributors to explain why 1-napthol is the major product of the reaction.
PROBLEM 21The existence of the NIH shift was established by determining the major product obtained

from rearrangement of the following arene oxide,in which a hydrogen has been replaced

by a deuterium:What would be the major product if the NIH shift did not occur? (
Hint:Recall fromSection11.7that a bond is easier to break than a bond.)
PROBLEM 22How would the major products obtained from rearrangement of the following arene oxides

differ?
OHDHODCDCHH2OOOHDDHCH3CH3naphthalene oxidemore stable1-naphthol90%OOHOH
2-naphthol10%OHcan be stabilized by electrondelocalization without destroying thearomaticity of the benzene ringless stableOHcan be stabilized by electrondelocalization only by destroying thearomaticity of the benzene ringBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 459
A segment of DNA 460CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
Some aromatic hydrocarbons are carcinogens
Ñcompounds that cause cancer.
Investigation has revealed,however,that it is not the hydrocarbon itself that is

carcinogenic,but rather the arene oxide into which the hydrocarbon is converted.

How do arene oxides cause cancer? We have seen that nucleophiles react with

epoxides to form addition products. a component of DNA

(Section27.1),has a nucleophilic group that is known to react with certain

arene oxides. Once becomes covalently attached to an arene

oxide,can no longer fit into the DNA double helix. Thus,the

genetic code cannot be properly transcribed,which can lead to mutations that

cause cancer. Cancer results when cells lose their ability to control their growth

and reproduction.Not all arene oxides are carcinogenic. Whether a particular arene oxide is carcino-
genic depends on the relative rates of its two reaction pathways
Ñrearrangement orreaction with a nucleophile. Arene oxide rearrangement leads to phenolic products

that are not carcinogenic,whereas formation of addition products from nucleophilic

attack by DNA can lead to cancer-causing products. Thus,if the rate of arene oxide re-

arrangement is greater than the rate of nucleophilic attack by DNA,the arene oxide

will be harmless. If,however,the rate of nucleophilic attack is greater than the rate of

rearrangement,the arene oxide will be a carcinogen.
Because the rate of arene oxide rearrangement depends on the stability of the carbo-cation formed in the first step of the rearrangement,
an arene oxideÕs cancer-causing
potential depends on the stability of this carbocation
. If the carbocation is relatively sta-
ble,rearrangement will be fast and the arene oxide will tend to be noncarcinogenic. If

the carbocation is relatively unstable,rearrangement will be slow and the arene oxide

will be more likely to undergo nucleophilic attack and be carcinogenic. This means that

the more reactive the arene oxide (the more easily it opens to form a carbocation),the

less likely it is to be carcinogenic.
PROBLEM 23SOLVED
Which compound is more likely to be carcinogenic?
a.b.
SOLUTION TO 23a
The nitro-substituted compound is more likely to be carcinogenic.
The nitro group destabilizes the carbocation formed when the ring opens by withdrawing

electrons from the ring by resonance. In contrast,the methoxy group stabilizes the

carbocation by resonance electron donation into the ring. Carbocation formation leads to

theharmless product,so the nitro-substituted compound with a less stable (harder-to-form)

carbocation will be less likely to undergo rearrangement to a harmless product. In addition,
OorOOCH3OorNO2OH2NHOOHOONONNHNHNONONNHNHOHOHOan arene oxide2-deoxyguanosinecovalently attachedto the arene oxide2-deoxyguanosine2-deoxyguanosineNH22-Deoxyguanosine,BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 460
cytochrome P450O2a diol epoxideOOH2Oepoxide hydrolaseHOHOHOHOSection 12.8Arene Oxides
461BENZO[a]PYRENE AND CANCERBenzo[a]pyrene is one of the most carcinogenic of
the aromatic hydrocarbons. This hydrocarbon is
formed whenever an organic compound undergoes incomplete

combustion. For example,benzo[
a]pyrene is found in cigarette
smoke,automobile exhaust,and charcoal-broiled meat. Several
The 4,5-oxide is harmful because it forms a carbocation thatcannot be stabilized by electron delocalization without destroy-

ing the aromaticity of an adjacent benzene ring. Thus,the car-

bocation is relatively unstable,so the epoxide will tend not to

open until it is attacked by a nucleophile. The 7,8-oxide is

harmful because it reacts with water to form a diol,which then

forms a diol epoxide. The diol epoxide does not readily under-

go rearrangement (the harmless pathway),because it opens to a

carbocation that is destabilized by the electron-withdrawing

OH groups. Therefore,the diol epoxide can exist long enough

to be attacked by nucleophiles (the carcinogenic pathway).
benzo[a]pyrene4,5-benzo[
a]pyrene oxide7,8-benzo[
a]pyrene oxideOOcytochrome P450O2112111098765
432arene oxides can be formed from benzo[a]pyrene. The two most
harmful are the 4,5-oxide and the 7,8-oxide. It has been suggest-

ed that people who develop lung cancer as a result of smoking

may have a higher than normal concentration of cytochrome
in their lung tissue.P450CHIMNEY SWEEPS AND CANCERIn 1775,a British physician named Percival Potts
was the first to recognize that environmental fac-
tors can cause cancer,when he became aware that chimney

sweeps had a higher incidence of scrotum cancer than the male

population as a whole. He theorized that something in the chim-

ney soot was causing cancer. We now know that it was

benzo[a]pyrene.
Titch Cox, the chimney
sweep responsible for
cleaning the 800 chimneys
at Buckingham Palace.the electron-withdrawing nitro group increases the arene oxide
Õs susceptibility tonucleophilic attack,the cancer-causing pathway.
OOCH3OCH3OHH2OONH2OOONOOOHBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 461
462CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
3-D Molecules:[15]-Crown-5;
[12]-Crown-4PROBLEM 24Explain why the two arene oxides in Problem 23a open in opposite directions.
PROBLEM 25Three arene oxides can be obtained from phenanthrene.a.Give the structures of the three phenanthrene oxides.
b.What phenols can be obtained from each phenanthrene oxide?
c.If a phenanthrene oxide can lead to the formation of more than one phenol,which
phenol will be obtained in greater yield?d.Which of the three phenanthrene oxides is most likely to be carcinogenic?
12.9Crown Ethers
Crown ethers
are cyclic compounds that have several ether linkages. A crown ether
specifically binds certain metal ions or organic molecules,depending on the size of

its cavity. The crown ether is called the 
ÒhostÓand the species it binds is called theÒguest.ÓBecause the ether linkages are chemically inert,the crown ether can bind
the guest without reacting with it. The 
crownÐguest complex
is called an inclusioncompound. Crown ethers are named [X]-crown-Y,where X is the total number of
atoms in the ring and Y is the number of oxygen atoms in the ring. [15]-Crown-5

selectively binds because the crown ether has a cavity diameter of 1.7 to 2.2
†and has an ionic diameter of 1.80
†. Binding occurs as a result of interaction of
the positively charged ion with the lone-pair electrons of the oxygens that point into

the cavity of the crown ether.
With an ionic diameter of 1.20
†,istoo small to be bound by [15]-crown-5,but it
binds neatly in [12]-crown-4. On the other hand,with an ionic diameter of 2.66
†,is too large to fit into [15]-crown-5,but is bound specifically by [18]-crown-6.
[12]-crown-4cavity diameter  1.21.5 †[18]-crown-6cavity diameter  2.63.2 †OOOOOOOOOOK,Lihost[15]-crown-5cavity diameter  1.72.2 †NaNaguestOOOOOinclusion compoundOOOOONaNaphenanthreneFor their work in the field of crown
ethers,
Charles J. Pedersen
,DonaldJ. Cram
,and 
Jean-Marie Lehn
shared the 1987 Nobel Prize in

chemistry.
Charles J. Pedersen (1904
Ð1989)was born in Korea to a Korean

mother and a Norwegian father. 

He moved to the United States as a

teenager and received a B.S. in

chemical engineering from the

University of Dayton and an M.S. in

organic chemistry from MIT. He

joined DuPont in 1927 and retired

from there in 1969. He is one of the

few people without a Ph.D. to receive

a Nobel Prize in the sciences.Jean-Marie Lehn
was born inFrance in 1939. He initially studied

philosophy and then switched to

chemistry. He received a Ph.D. from

the University of Strasbourg. 

As a postdoctoral fellow,he worked

with R. B. Woodward at Harvard on

the total synthesis of vitamin 
(See pages000 and 000.) He is a

professor of chemistry at the

Universit” Louis Pasteur in

Strasbourg,France,and at the

Coll‘ge de France in Paris.
12.X-RefBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 462
Section 12.9Crown Ethers
4633-D Molecule:[18]-Crown-6
with potassium ionDonald J. Cram (1919
Ð2001)wasborn in Vermont. He received a B.S.

from Rollins College,an M.S. from

the University of Nebraska,and a

Ph.D. from Harvard University. 

He was a professor of chemistry at

the University of California,

Los Angeles,and was an avid surfer.
The ability of a host to bind only certain guests is an example of 
molecularrecognition
. Molecular recognition explains how enzymes recognize their substrates,
how antibodies recognize antigens,how drugs recognize receptors,and many other

biochemical processes. Only recently have chemists been able to design and synthe-

size organic molecules that exhibit molecular recognition,although the specificity of

these synthetic compounds for their guests is generally less highly developed than the

specificity exhibited by biological molecules.
A remarkable property of crown ethers is that they allow inorganic salts to be
dissolved in nonpolar organic solvents,thus permitting many reactions to be carried

out in nonpolar solvents that otherwise would not be able to take place. For example,

the reaction of 1-bromohexane with acetate ion poses a problem because potassi-

um acetate is an ionic compound that is soluble only in water,whereas the alkyl halide

is insoluble in water. In addition,acetate ion is an extremely poor nucleophile.
Potassium acetate can be dissolved in a nonpolar solvent such as benzene if
[18]-crown-6 is added to the solution. The crown ether binds potassium in its cavity,and

the nonpolar crown ether
Ðpotassium complex dissolves in benzene,along with the ac-
etate ion,to maintain electrical neutrality. The crown ether is acting as a 
phase-transfercatalystÑit is bringing a reactant into the phase where it is needed. Because acetate is
not solvated in the nonpolar solvent,it is a much better nucleophile than it would be in a
SN2[18]-crown-6
[15]-crown-5
[12]-crown-4
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3COBrOCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OCCH3O[18]-crown-6soluble only in anonpolar soventsoluble only
in waterAN IONOPHOROUS ANTIBIOTICAn antibiotic is a compound that interferes with
the growth of microorganisms. Nonactin is a
naturally occurring antibiotic that owes its biological activity to

its ability to disrupt the carefully maintained electrolyte balance
between the inside and outside of a cell. To achieve the gradient

between potassium and sodium ions inside and outside the cell

that is required for normal cell function,potassium ions are

pumped in and sodium ions are pumped out. Nonactin disrupts

this gradient by acting like a crown ether. Nonactin
Õs diameteris such that it specifically binds potassium ions. The eight

oxygens that point into the cavity and interact with are

highlighted in the structure shown here. The outside of nonactin

is nonpolar,so it can easily transport ions out of the cell
KKthrough the nonpolar cell membrane. The decreased concentra-
tion of within the cell causes the bacterium to die. Nonactin

is an example of an 
ionophorous
antibiotic. An 
ionophore
is acompound that transports metal ions by binding them tightly.
OOOOOOOOOOOnonactinOKBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 463
464CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
protic polar solvent (Section 10.3). Recall that if a reactant in the rate-determining step is
charged,the reaction will be faster in a nonpolar solvent (Section10.10).
Crown ethers have been used to dissolve many other salts in nonpolar solvents. 
In each case,the positively charged ion is nestled within the crown ether and is 

accompanied by a Ònaked
Óanion in the nonpolar solvent.
12.10Thiols, Sulfides, and Sulfonium SaltsThiolsare sulfur analogs of alcohols. Thiols used to be called mercaptans because
they form strong complexes with heavy metal cations such as mercury and arsenic

(they capture mercury).
Thiolsare named by adding the suffix 
ÒthiolÓto the name of the parent hydrocar-
bon. If there is a second functional group in the molecule,the SH group can be

indicated by its substituent name,Òmercapto.ÓLike other substituent names,it is cited
before the name of the parent hydrocarbon.Low-molecular-weight thiols are noted for their strong and pungent odors,such as
those associated with onions,garlic,and skunks. Natural gas is completely odorless

and can cause deadly explosions if a leak goes undetected. Therefore,a small amount

of a thiol is added to natural gas to give it an odor so that gas leaks can be detected.
Sulfur is larger than oxygen,so the negative charge of the thiolate ion is spread over a
larger volume of space,causing it to be more stable than an alkoxide ion. Recall that the

more stable the base,the stronger is its conjugate acid (Section1.18). Thiols,therefore,

are stronger acids than alcohols,and thiolate ions are weaker bases than

alkoxide ions. The larger thiolate ions are less well solvated than alkoxide ions,so in

protic solvents thiolate ions are better nucleophiles than alkoxide ions (Section10.3).
Because sulfur is not as electronegative as oxygen,thiols are not good at hydrogen bond-
ing. Consequently,they have weaker intermolecular attractions and,therefore,consider-

ably lower boiling points than alcohols have (Section2.9). For example,the boiling

point of is 78
¡C,whereas the boiling point of is 37
¡C.The sulfur analogs of ethers are called sulfides
or thioethers. Sulfur is an excellent
nucleophile because its electron cloud is polarizable (Section10.3). Sulfides,there-

fore,react readily with alkyl halides to form 
sulfonium salts
Ña reaction that an ethercannot undergo because oxygen is not as nucleophilic and cannot accommodate a

charge as easily.
Because it has a weakly basic leaving group,a sulfonium ion readily undergoes
nucleophilic substitution reactions. As with other reactions,the reaction works best
SN2CH3SCH3CH3CH3CH3SCH3IIdimethylsulfidetrimethylsulfonium iodidea sulfonium saltCH3CH2SHCH3CH2OHCH3SCH
3CH2CH3OHCH3SCH2CH3BrBrpa103-methyl-1-butanethiolCH3CH3CHCH2CH2SH1-propanethiolCH3CH2CH2SH2-mercaptoethanolHSCH2CH2OHethanethiolCH3CH2SHmercuric iona thiol2 CH3CH2SHCH
3CH2SSCH
2CH3HgHg22 H3-D Molecule:Methanethiol3-D Molecules:Dimethyl sulfide;
Trimethylsulfonium cation
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 464
Section 12.10Thiols, Sulfides, and Sulfonium Salts
465The blistering caused by mustard gas is due to the high local
concentrations of HCl that are produced when water
Ñor any
other nucleophileÑreacts with the gas when it comes into
contact with the skin or lungs. Autopsies of soldiers killed by

mustard gas in World War I
Ñestimated to be about 400,000
Ñshowed that they had extremely low white blood cell counts,

indicating that the gas interfered with bone marrow develop-

ment. An international treaty in the 1980s banned its use and

required that all stockpiles of mustard gas be destroyed.
ClCH2CH2SCH2CH2ClCH2CH2SCH2CH2ClCH2CH2SCH2CH2OHClClHH2OH2OSCH2CH2OHCH2CH2ClHOCH2CH2SCH2CH2OHHmustard gassulfonium salt
ANTIDOTE TO A WAR GAS
Lewisite is a war gas developed in 1917 by W. Lee
Lewis,an American scientist. The gas rapidly
penetrates clothing and skin and is poisonous because it con-

tains arsenic,which combines with thiol groups on enzymes,

thereby inactivating the enzymes. During World War II,the
Allies were concerned that the Germans would use lewisite,so
British scientists developed an antidote to lewisite that the Al-

lies called ÒBritish anti-lewisite
Ó(BAL). BAL contains two
thiol groups that react with lewisite,thereby preventing it from

reacting with the thiol groups of enzymes.CH2SHCH2OHBALCHSHCllewisiteHCHCClHAsCCH2SCHSAsClClCH2OHHC2 HCl
if the group undergoing nucleophilic attack is a methyl group or a primary alkyl group.
In Section10.11,we saw that SAM,a biological methylating agent,is a sulfonium salt.
PROBLEM 26Using an alkyl halide and a thiol as starting materials,how would you prepare the following
compounds?a.c.
b.d.
SCH2CH3CH3SCCH3CH3CH2CHCHSCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2SCH2CH3HOCH
3SCH3CH3OHCH3CH3SCH3MUSTARD GAS
Chemical warfare occurred for the first time in
1915,when Germany released chlorine gas
against French and British forces in the battle of Ypres. For the

remainder of World War I,both sides used a variety of chemical

agents. One of the more common war gases was mustard gas,a

reagent that produces blisters over the surface of the body. It is

a very reactive compound because the highly nucleophilic

sulfur easily displaces a chloride ion by an intramolecular 
reaction,forming a cyclic sulfonium salt that reacts rapidly

with a nucleophile. The sulfonium salt is particularly reactive

because of the strained three-membered ring.SN2BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 465
466CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
PROBLEM 27Finding that mustard gas interfered with bone marrow development caused chemists to
look for less reactive mustard gases that might be used clinically. The following three

compounds were studied:One was found to be too reactive,one was found to be too unreactive,and one was found
to be too insoluble in water to be injected intravenously. Which is which? (
Hint:Draw
resonance contributors.)
12.11Organometallic CompoundsAlcohols,ethers,and alkyl halides all contain a carbon atom that is bonded to a more
electronegative atom. The carbon atom,therefore,is 
electrophilic
and reacts with anucleophile.But what if you wanted a carbon atom to react with an electrophile? For that,you
would need a compound with a nucleophilic carbon atom. To be 
nucleophilic,carbon
would have to be bonded to a less electronegative atom.
A carbon bonded to a metal is nucleophilic because most metals are less electroneg-
ative than carbon (Table12.3). An 
organometallic compound
is a compound thatcontains a carbonÐmetal bond. Organolithium compounds
and organomagnesium
compoundsare two of the most common organometallic compounds. The electrostatic
potential maps show that the carbon atom attached to the halogen in the alkyl halide is

an electrophile (it is blue-green),whereas the carbon atom attached to the metal ion in

the organometallic compound is a nucleophile (it is red).
CH3LiCH3Clelectrophileless electronegativethan carbonnucleophileCH3CH2ECH3CH2MMECH3CH2YCH3CH2ZZYelectrophilenucleophile
more electronegativethan carbonNHCCH3OCH2CH2ClCH2CH2ClNCH2CH2ClCH2CH2ClNCH2CH2ClCH2CH2ClBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 466
Section 12.11Organometallic Compounds
467Table 12.3
The Electronegativities of Some of the Elements
aaFrom the scale devised by Linus Pauling
IAIIAIBIIBIIIAIVAVAVIAVIIA
H2.1Li1.0Na0.9K0.8Be1.5Mg1.2B2.0Al1.5C2.5Si1.8N3.0P2.1O3.5S2.5F4.0Cl3.0Br2.8I2.5Ca1.0Cu1.8Ag1.4Cd1.5Hg1.5Zn1.7Ga1.8Sn1.7Pb1.6Ge2.03-D Molecules:Chlorobenzene;
PhenyllithiumOrganolithium compounds
areprepared by adding lithium to an alkyl halide in a
nonpolar solvent such as hexane.
Organomagnesium compounds
,frequently called 
Grignard reagents
after theirdiscoverer,are prepared by adding an alkyl halide to magnesium shavings being

stirred in anhydrous diethyl ether or THF. The magnesium is inserted between the

carbon and the halogen.The solvent (usually diethyl ether or tetrahydrofuran) plays a crucial role in the
formation of a Grignard reagent. Because the magnesium atom of a Grignard reagent is

surrounded by only four electrons,it needs two more pairs of electrons to form an octet.

Solvent molecules provide these electrons by coordinating (supplying electron pairs) to

the metal. Coordination allows the Grignard reagent to dissolve in the solvent and

prevents it from coating the magnesium shavings,which would make them unreactive.
The organometallic compounds form when the metal (Li or Mg) donates its valence
electrons to the partially positively charged carbon of the alkyl halide.
CH3CH22 LiBrCH
3CH2LiBrLiCH3CH2MgBrCH
3CH2MgBrcyclohexylbromidecyclohexylmagnesiumbromidediethyl etherTHFvinylbromideCH2CHBrvinylmagnesiumbromideCH2CHMgBrMgMgBrMgBrhexanebutyllithium1-bromobutanechlorobenzenephenyllithium
CH3CH2CH2CH2Brhexane2 Li2 LiClLiClLiCH3CH2CH2CH2LiLiBr
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 467
Reaction with the metal converts the alkyl halide into a compound that will react with
electrophiles instead of nucleophiles. Thus,organolithium and organomagnesium

compounds react as if they were carbanions.
Alkyl halides,vinyl halides,and aryl halides can all be used to form organolithium
and organomagnesium compounds. Alkyl bromides are the alkyl halides most often

used to form organometallic compounds because they react more readily than alkyl

chlorides and are less expensive than alkyl iodides.
The nucleophilic carbon of an organometallic compound reacts with an electrophile.
For example,in the following reactions,the organolithium reagent and the Grignard

reagent each react with an epoxide.Notice that when an organometallic compound reacts with ethylene oxide,a primary
alcohol containing two more carbons than the organometallic compound is formed.
PROBLEM 28What alcohols would be formed from the reaction of ethylene oxide with the following
Grignard reagents?a.b.c.
PROBLEM 29How could the following compounds be prepared,using cyclohexene oxide as a starting
material?Organomagnesium and organolithium compounds are such strong bases that they
will react immediately with any acid that is present in the reaction mixture
Ñeven with
very weak acids such as water and alcohols. When this happens,the organometallic

compound is converted into an alkane. If is used instead of a deuterated

compound will be obtained.H2O,D2OCH2CH3a.b.c.
CH3BrMgClCH2MgBrCH3CH2CH2MgBrethylmagnesium bromidephenyllithiumCH3CH2MgBrLireacts as if it were
CH3CH2MgBrreacts as if it wereLiHCH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH2CH2CH2OHH2CMg2BrCH2OMgBrH+CH3CH3CHCHCH
3OLiCH
3CHCHCH3OLiCH3CH3CHCHCH3OHCH3468CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
3-D Molecules:Phenyllithium;
Ethylmagnesium bromideFrancis August Victor Grignard
(1871Ð1935)was born in France,the
son of a sailmaker. He received a

Ph.D. from the University of Lyons in

1901. His synthesis of the first

Grignard reagent was announced in

1900. During the next five years,

some 200 papers were published

about Grignard reagents. He was 

a professor of chemistry at the

University of Nancy and later at 

the University of Lyons. He shared

the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1912

with Paul Sabatier (p.173). During

World War I,Grignard was drafted

into the French army,where he

developed a method to detect war

gases.BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 468
This means that Grignard reagents and organolithium compounds cannot be prepared
from compounds that contain acidic groups 
or groups). Because even trace amounts of moisture can destroy
an organometallic compound,it is important that all reagents be dry when organometallic

compounds are being synthesized and when they react with other reagents.
PROBLEM 30SOLVED
Show,using any necessary reagents,how the following compounds could be prepared with
ethylene oxide as one of the reactants:a.c.
b.d.
SOLUTIONa.b.c.d.the same reaction sequence as in a,but with butyl bromide in the first step.
PROBLEM 31Which of the following reactions will occur? (For the values necessary to do this
problem,see Appendix II.)
HOMgBrThere are many different organometallic compounds. As long as the metal is less
electronegative than carbon,the carbon bonded to the metal will be nucleophilic.
The reactivity of an organometallic compound toward an electrophile depends on
the polarity of the carbonÐmetal bond:The greater the polarity of the bond,the more
reactive the compound is as a nucleophile. The polarity of the bond depends on the

difference in electronegativity between the metal and carbon (Table12.3). For

example,magnesium has an electronegativity of 1.2,compared with 2.5 for carbon.

This large difference in electronegativity makes the carbon
Ðmagnesium bond highly
CMg

CLi

CCu

CCd

CSi

CZn

CAl

CPb

CHg

CSn
HCCMgBrCH4HCCHCH3MgBrCH3NMgBrCH4CH3NH2CH3MgBrH2NMgBrCH4NH3CH3MgBrCH3OMgBrCH4CH3OHCH3MgBrCH4H2OCH3MgBrpaMgEt2OD2Oproduct of bCH
3CH2CH2CH2MgBrCH
3CH2CH2CH2DPBr3product of aCH
3CH2CH2CH2BrMgEt2OHOCH3CH2BrCH
3CH2MgBrCH
3CH2CH2CH2OH1.2.CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CH2DCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCOOHCCH,SH,NHR,NH2,(OH,MgTHFH2OD2OCH3CH2CHCH3BrDCH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH3MgBrSection 12.11Organometallic Compounds
469BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 469
470CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
polar. (The carbon
Ðmagnesium bond is about 52% ionic.) Lithium (1.0) is even less
electronegative than magnesium (1.2). Thus,the carbon
Ðlithium bond is more polar
than the carbonÐmagnesium bond. Therefore,an organolithium reagent is a more
reactive nucleophilic reagent than a Grignard reagent.
The names of organometallic compounds usually begin with the name of the alkyl
group,followed by the name of the metal.
A Grignard reagent will undergo 
transmetallation(metal exchange) if it is added to a
metal halide whose metal is more electronegative than magnesium. In other words,metal

exchange will occur if it results in a less polar carbon
Ðmetal bond. For example,cadmium
(1.5) is more electronegative than magnesium (1.2). Consequently,a carbon
Ðcadmiumbond is less polar than a carbonÐmagnesium bond,so metal exchange occurs.
PROBLEM 32What organometallic compound will be formed from the reaction of methylmagnesium
chloride and (
Hint:See Table12.3.)
12.12Coupling ReactionsNew carbon
Ðcarbon bonds can be made using an organometallic reagent in which the
metal ion is a transition metal. Transition metals are indicated by purple in the periodic

table on the last page of this book. The reactions are called 
coupling reactions
becausetwo groups (any two alkyl,aryl,or vinyl groups) are joined (coupled together).
The first organometallic compounds used in coupling reactions were 
Gilmanreagents
,also called 
organocuprates
. They are prepared by the reaction of an organo-
lithium reagent with cuprous iodide in diethyl ether or THF.
Gilman reagents are very useful to synthetic chemists. When a Gilman reagent
reacts with an alkyl halide (with the exception of alkyl fluorides,which do not

undergo this reaction),one of the alkyl groups of the Gilman reagent replaces the

halogen. Notice that this means that an alkane can be formed from two alkyl

halidesÑone alkyl halide is used to form the Gilman reagent,which then reacts with
the second alkyl halide. The precise mechanism of the reaction is unknown,but is

thought to involve radicals.
Gilman reagents can be used to prepare compounds that cannot be prepared by using
nucleophilic substitution reactions. For example,reactions cannot be used to
SN2organolithiumreagentCH3Li(CH
3)2CuLiCuIGilman reagentTHFLiI2SiCl4  ?ethylmagnesiumchloride2 CH3CH2MgClCdCl
2diethylcadmium(CH3CH2)2Cd2 MgCl2CH3CH2MgBrCH
3CH2CH2CH2Li(CH
3CH2CH2)2Cd(CH
3CH2)4Pbdipropylcadmiumtetraethyllead
ethylmagnesiumbromidebutyllithiumHenry Gilman (1893Ð1986)wasborn in Boston. He received his B.A.

and Ph.D. degrees from Harvard

University. He joined the faculty at

Iowa State University in 1919,where

he remained for his entire career. 

He published over 1000 research

papers
Ñmore than half after he lost
almost all of his sight as the result of

a detached retina and glaucoma in

1947. His wife,Ruth,acted as his

eyes for 40 years.
CH3CH2CH2CH2Br(CH
2CH2CH2)2CuLiCH
3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CuheptaneTHFLiBrBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 470
prepare the following compounds because vinyl and aryl halides cannot undergo
nucleophilic attack (Section10.8):
Gilmanreagents can even replace halogens in compounds that contain other functional
groups.PROBLEM 33Explain why tertiary alkyl halides cannot be used in coupling reactions with Gilman
reagents.PROBLEM 34Muscalure is the sex attractant of the common housefly. Flies are lured to traps by filling

them with fly bait containing both muscalure and an insecticide. Eating the bait is fatal.
How could you synthesize muscalure using the following reagents?
Coupling reactions can be carried out that give high yields of products (80
Ð98%)using a transition-metal catalyst. In each of the following reactions,the catalyst is palladium(0),ligated to four mole-
cules of phenyl phosphine.
PPPh3Pdtransition-metal catalystPh3PPPh
3Ph3PPPh
3triphenyl phosphineCH3(CH2)7(CH2)8BrHHCCCH
3(CH2)4BrandmuscalureCH3(CH2)7(CH2)12CH3HHCCSection 12.12Coupling Reactions
471(CH3CH2)2CuLiBrITHFCH3CH2CuHCH2CH3CH3CHH3CH3CCCCH3CLiBr(CH3)2CuLiTHFCH3CH3CuLiITutorial:
Organometallic compoundsCH2CCu(CH3)2CuLiTHFCH3CuCH3CHCCH3OBrOCH3CH3CH22CuLiCCH3CCH
2CH3CH3ClCH3CH3CHCCH3THFLiClLiBrBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 471
472CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
The Heck reaction
couples an aryl,benzyl,or vinyl halide or triflate (Section12.4)
with an alkene in a basic solution.
The Stille reaction
couples an aryl,benzyl,or vinyl halide or triflate with a stannane.
Aryl and vinyl groups are coupled preferentially,but an alkyl group can be coupled if
a tetraalkylstannane is used.
The Suzuki reaction
couples an aryl,benzyl,or vinyl halide with an organoborane in
a basic solution.PROBLEM 35What alkyl halides would you utilize to synthesize the following compounds,using the
organoborane shown?
BOOan organoboraneCH2BrCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2NaBrBOOHOBOONaBrHOBOOPd(PPh3)4BrCH3CH3CHCH3CH3CHCH
NaOHPd(PPh3)4NaOHBOOCHSuzuki reactionan aryl halidean aryl triflatePd(PPh3)4CCH3BrCH2CH2(CH3CH2)3NPd(PPh3)4(CH3CH2)3NHBrHOTfOCCH3CHCH
2OCH3OHeck reactionOTfCH3Oa stannaneTHFCH3(CH3CH2CH2CH2)3SnBrStille reactionCHSn(CH2CH2CH2CH3)3Pd(PPh3)4CHCH
2BrTHFPd(PPh3)4CH2CH2CH2CH3(CH3CH2CH2CH2)4SnOTf(CH3CH2CH2CH2)3SnOTftetrabutylstannaneJohn K. Stille
was a professor of
chemistry at Colorado State

University until his untimely death in

1989 in a commercial air crash on

his way to a scientific meeting in

Switzerland.BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 472
PROBLEM 36The organoborane used in a Suzuki reaction is prepared by the reaction of catecholborane
with an alkene or an alkyne.
What hydrocarbon would you use to prepare the organoborane of Problem 35?
PROBLEM 37Give two sets of alkyl bromide and alkene that could be used in a Heck reaction to prepare
the following compound:
CH3CCHOCH
3CHOcatecholboraneRCH2CH2BOOCH2RCHB
HOOTutorial:
Common termsSummary473SummaryAlcoholsand ethershave leaving groups that are stronger
bases than halide ions,so alcohols and ethers are less reac-

tive than alkyl halides and have to be 
Òactivated
Óbefore they
can undergo a substitution or an elimination reaction.

Epoxidesdo not have to be activated,because ring strain in-
creases their reactivity. 
Sulfonate esters
and sulfonium
saltshave weakly basic leaving groups,so they undergo sub-
stitution reactions with ease. is such a strong base that

amines cannot undergo substitution or elimination reactions.
Primary,secondary,and tertiary alcohols undergo nucleo-
philic substitution reactions with HI,HBr,and HCl to form

alkyl halides. These are reactions in the case of primary

alcohols and reactions in the case of secondary and ter-

tiary alcohols. An alcohol can also be converted into an alkyl

halide by phosphorus trihalides or thionyl chloride. These

reagents convert the alcohol into an intermediate with a

leaving group that is readily displaced by a halide ion.
Conversion to a 
sulfonate ester
is another way to activate
an alcohol for subsequent reaction with a nucleophile. Be-

cause a sulfonic acid is a strong acid,its conjugate base is

weak. Activating an alcohol by converting it to a sulfonate

ester forms a substitution product with a configuration oppo-

site to that of the alcohol,whereas activating an alcohol by

converting it to an alkyl halide forms a substitution product

with the same configuration as the alcohol.
An alcohol can be dehydrated if heated with an acid cat-alyst; dehydration
is an E2 reaction in the case of primaryalcohols and an E1 reaction in the case of secondary and

tertiary alcohols. Tertiary alcohols are the easiest to dehy-

drate and primary alcohols are the hardest. E1 reactions
SN1SN2NH2form carbocation intermediates,so carbocation and 
ring-expansion rearrangements
can occur. The major product
is the more substituted alkene. Both the 
Eand Zisomers areobtained,but the isomer with the bulky groups on opposite

sides of the double bond predominates.Etherscan undergo nucleophilic substitution reactions
with HBr or HI; if departure of the leaving group creates a

relatively stable carbocation,an reaction occurs; other-

wise an reaction occurs.
Epoxidesundergo ring-opening reactions. Under basic
conditions,the least sterically hindered carbon is attacked;

under acidic conditions,the most substituted carbon is at-

tacked. 
Arene oxides
undergo rearrangment to form phe-
nols or nucleophilic attack to form addition products. An

arene oxideÕs cancer-causing potential depends on the sta-
bility of the carbocation formed during rearrangement.A crown ether
specifically binds certain metal ions or
organic molecules,depending on the size of its cavity,form-

ing an inclusion compound. The ability of a host to bind
only certain guests is an example of 
molecular recognition
.The crown ether can act as a 
phase-transfer catalyst.Thiolsare sulfur analogs of alcohols. They are stronger
acids and have lower boiling points than alcohols. Thiolate

ionsare weaker bases and better nucleophiles in protic sol-

vents than alkoxide ions. Sulfur analogs of ethers are called

sulfides
or thioethers. Sulfides react with alkyl halides to
form sulfonium salts
.Grignard reagents
and organolithium compounds
arethe most common 
organometallic compounds
Ñcompoundsthat contain a carbon
Ðmetal bond. They cannot be prepared
SN2SN1a.b.c.
BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 473
474CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
from compounds that contain acidic groups. The carbon 
atom attached to the halogen in the alkyl halide is an elec-

trophile,whereas the carbon atom attached to the metal ion in

the organometallic compound is a nucleophile. The greater

the polarity of the carbon
Ðmetal bond,the more reactive the
organometallic compound is as a nucleophile.
New carbon
Ðcarbon bonds can be made using transition-metal organometallic reagents. The reactions are called

coupling reactions
because two carbon-containing groups
are joined together. 
Gilman reagents
were the first
organometallic compounds used in coupling reactions. The

Heck,Stille,and 
Suzuki reactions
are coupling reactions.Summary of Reactions1.Conversion of an 
alcoholto an alkyl halide
(Sections12.1and 12.3).
2.Conversion of an alcohol to a 
sulfonate ester(Section12.4).
3.Conversion of an 
activated alcohol(an alkyl halide or a sulfonate ester) to a 
compound with a new group bonded to thecarbon
(Section12.4).
4.Dehydration of alcohols (Section12.5).
5.Cleavage of ethers (Section12.6).
HX    HBr or HIRORHXROHR
XHCOHCCC
CCH2OH2SO4HCOHCH2OPOCl3relative rate:  tertiary  >  secondary  >  primarypyridine, 0 CRYS
OORROS
OORYORYRBrY
Brsp3ROHR
SOOClROS
OORHClpyridineROHHBrRBr
ROHHIRI
ROHHClRCl
ZnCl2ROHPBr
3RBrROHPCl
3RClROHSOCl
2RClpyridinepyridinepyridineBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 474
Summary of Reactions4756.Ring-opening reactions of 
epoxides(Section12.7)
7.Reactions of 
arene oxides
:ring opening and rearrangement (Section12.8).
8.Reactions of thiols,sulfides,and sulfonium salts (Section12.10).
9.Reaction of a 
Grignard reagent
with an epoxide(Section12.11).
10.Reaction of a 
Gilman reagent
with an alkyl halide
(Section12.12).
11.Reaction of an 
aryl,benzyl,or 
vinyl halideor triflatewith an alkene
:the Heck reaction (Section12.12).
OTfCH2CH2CHCH
2(CH3CH2)3NPd(PPh3)4(CH3CH2)3NPd(PPh3)4BrTHFRLiCuIR
2CuLiTHFCH3CH2CH2XX    Cl, Br, or IR2CuLiRCu
LiXCH3CH2CH2R2LiIGilman reagentdiethyl ethera Grignard reagentproduct alcohol contains two more carbons than the Grignard reagentMgHH2CRMgBrRBrRMgBr
OCH2RCH2CH2ORCH2CH2OH2 RSHRSSR
HgHg22 HRSRSRRSRRSRR
IIRBrBrRYRSRY
RSRRRYOHOHYOHCH3OHunder acidic conditions, the nucleophileattacks the more substituted ring-carbonCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CCH2OHOCH3OCH2CH3COCH2CH3OCH3OHunder basic conditions, the nucleophileattacks the less sterically hindered ring-carbonCH3CH3CCH2OCH3OHBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 475
476CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
12.Reaction of an 
aryl,benzyl,or 
vinyl halideor triflatewith a stannane:the Stille reaction (Section12.12).
13.Reaction of an 
aryl,benzyl,or 
vinyl halidewith an organoborane
:the Suzuki reaction (Section12.12).
NaOHRBrRBOONaOHCHCHR
BrRCHCHB
OOPd(PPh3)4Pd(PPh3)4THFRSnR4OTfTHFPd(PPh3)4Pd(PPh3)4CHCH
2CH2CHSnR3BrKey Terms
alcohol (p.437)
alkyl tosylate (p.444)

alkyl triflate (p.444)

arene oxide (p.457)

coupling reaction (p.470)

crown ether (p.462)

dehydration (p.445)

epoxide (p.454)

ether (p.451)

Gilman reagent (p.470)
Grignard reagent (p.467)
Heck reaction (p.472)

inclusion compound (p.462)

molecular recognition (p.463)

organocuprate (p.470)

organolithium compound (p.467)

organomagnesium compound (p.467)

organometallic compound (p.466)

oxirane (p.454)

phase-transfer catalyst (p.463)
ring-expansion rearrangement (p.447)
Stille reaction (p.472)

sulfide (p.464)

sulfonate ester (p.443)

sulfonium salt (p.464)

Suzuki reaction (p.472)

thioether (p.464)

thiol (p.464)

transmetallation (p.470)
Problems
38.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.i.
e.j.
THFSn(CH2CH2CH3)4BrPd(PPh3)4Et3NCH2CH2IPd(PPh3)42.  H, H2O1.  ethylene oxideCH2MgBrCH3CH2CHCH
3OHCHOCH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH2OHCH3pyridineSOCl2CH3CHCH2CH2OH2.1.  p-toluenesulfonyl chlorideCH3OCH3CH2CH2CH2OHH2SO4pyridineCH3CH2CH2CH2OHPBr3CH3CH2CHC
OCH3CH3CH3OHCH3OCH3CH2CH2OHO2.  CH3CO1.  methanesulfonyl chlorideBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 476
Problems47739.Indicate which alcohol will undergo dehydration more rapidly when heated with 
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
40.Which of the following alkyl halides could be successfully used to form a Grignard reagent?
a.b.c.d.
41.Starting with (
R)-1-deuterio-1-propanol,how could you prepare:
a.(
S)-1-deuterio-1-propanol?b.(
S)-1-deuterio-1-methoxypropane?c.(
R)-1-deuterio-1-methoxypropane?42.What alkenes would you expect to be obtained from the acid-catalyzed dehydration of 1-hexanol?

43.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.
44.When heated with both 3,3-dimethyl-2-butanol and 2,3-dimethyl-2-butanol are dehydrated to form 2,3-dimethyl-2-butene.
Which alcohol dehydrates more rapidly?45.Using the given starting material,any necessary inorganic reagents,and any carbon-containing compounds with no more than two
carbon atoms,indicate how the following syntheses could be carried out:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
CH3CHCH2OHCH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH2OHCH3BrCH
2CH2OHCH3CH2CCHCCH
2CH2OHCH3CH2COCH3ClCH
2CH2CNOHH2SO4,OCH3OHCH3OH2SO4CH3CH2CHCCH3OHCH
3CH3(CH3CH2CH2)2CuLiClOHCH3OHCH3CHCH2OCH3HICH3HOHHCH32.  NaCN
1.  TsCl/pyridineCH3CHCCH
3OHCH3H2SO4CH3CH3COCH2CH3HBrCH3CH3H2NCH2CH2CH2BrCH3NCH2CH2CH2BrCH3BrCH
2CH2CH2COHOHOCH2CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CHCH3orOHCH3CCH2CH3OHCH3orCH3OHOHH3CorCH2CH2OHOHCHCH3orOHOH
OHorCHCH3OHCHCH3orCH2CH2OHCH2OHH2SO4.BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 477
478CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
46.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
47.When deuterated phenanthrene oxide undergoes an epoxide rearrangement in water,81% of the deuterium is retained in the produ
ct.a.What percentage of the deuterium will be retained if an NIH shift occurs?
b.What percentage of the deuterium will be retained if an NIH shift does not occur?
48.When 3-methyl-2-butanol is heated with concentrated HBr,a rearranged product is obtained. When 2-methyl-1-propanol reacts
under the same conditions,a rearranged product is not obtained. Explain.
49.When the following seven-membered ring alcohol is dehydrated,three alkenes are formed:
Propose a mechanism for their formation.50.How could you synthesize isopropyl propyl ether,using isopropyl alcohol as the only carbon-containing reagent?

51.Ethylene oxide reacts readily with because of the strain in the three-membered ring. Cyclopropane has approximately the
same amount of strain,but does not react with Explain.
52.Which of the following ethers would be obtained in greatest yield directly from alcohols?
53.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.
54.Indicate how each of the following compounds could be prepared,using the given starting material:
a.d.
b.e.
c.55.Triethylene glycol is one of the products obtained from the reaction of ethylene oxide and hydroxide ion. Propose a mechanis
m forits formation.H2CHO
CH2OHOCH2CH2OCH2CH2OCH2CH2OHtriethylene glycolCH3CCH2CH2CH3CH3OHCH3CHCHCH2CH3CH3BrCH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2OHOHOHD
CH3HBrBrCH
2CH2CH2CH2CH2BrH
2OOHHOCH2CH2CH2CH2OHH
2OOCH3OCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2OCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3OCCH3CH3CH3HO.HOH2SO4CH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3COHOHDCH3CHCHCH
3OCH2ClCH3OHCH3CHCl
CHCH2OCH3OOBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 478
Problems47956.Give the major product expected from the reaction of 2-ethyloxirane with each of the following reagents:
a.0.1 M HClc.ethyl magnesium bromide in ether,followed by 0.1M HCle.

b.d.0.1 M NaOH
57.When ethyl ether is heated with excess HI for several hours,the only organic product obtained is ethyl iodide. Explain why e
thylalcohol is not obtained as a product.58.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
b.A small amount of a product containing a six-membered ring is also formed. Give the structure of that product.
c.Why is so little six-membered ring product formed?
59.Identify A through H.
60.Greg Nard added an equivalent of 3,4-epoxy-4-methylcyclohexanol to an ether solution of methyl magnesium bromide and then
added dilute hydrochloric acid. He expected that the product would be a diol. He did not get any of the expected product. What

product did he get?61.An ion with a positively charged nitrogen atom in a three-membered ring is called an aziridinium ion. The following aziridin
iumion reacts with sodium methoxide to form A and B:
If a small amount of aqueous is added to A,the reddish color of persists,but the color disappears when is added to B.
When the aziridinium ion reacts with methanol,only A is formed. Identify A and B.
62.Dimerization is a side reaction that occurs during the preparation of a Grignard reagent. Propose a mechanism that accounts 
for theformation of the dimer.
63.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.OHHH2OOHH2SO4OHOOHHH2OBrMgBr
a dimerMgBr2Br2Br2NCCCH3an aziridinium ionH3CCH3H3CCH3H3C3,4-epoxy-4-methyl-cyclohexanol1,2-dimethyl-1,4-cyclohexanediolOOHH3COHH3COH
CH3CH3BrCH
3CH2CH2OHCAB1.  D2.  ECH3CH2CH2OCH2CH2OH1.  F2.  G3.  HCH2CH2CH2BrBrOCH2OCH3CH3OOCH3OHHCH3OHCH3OBRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 479
480CHAPTER 12Reactions of Alcohols, Ethers, Epoxides, and Sulfur-Containing Compounds
64.One method used to synthesize an epoxide is to treat an alkene with an aqueous solution of followed by an aqueous solution
of sodium hydroxide.
a.Propose a mechanism for the conversion of cyclohexene into cyclohexene oxide by this method.

b.How many products are formed when cyclohexene oxide reacts with methoxide ion in methanol? Draw their structures.
65.Which of the following reactions occurs most rapidly? Why?
a.b.c.
66.When bromobenzene reacts with propene in a Heck reaction,two constitutional isomers are obtained as products. Give the
structures of the products and explain why two products are obtained.
67.A vicinal diol has OH groups on adjacent carbons. The dehydration of a vicinal diol is accompanied by a rearrangement called
 thepinacol rearrangement. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.68.Although 2-methyl-1,2-propanediol is an asymmetrical vicinal diol,only one product is obtained when it is dehydrated in the
presence of acid.
a.What is this product?b.Why is only one product formed?
69.What product is obtained when the following vicinal diol is heated in an acidic solution?
70.Two stereoisomers are obtained from the reaction of cyclopentene oxide and dimethylamine. The 
R,R-isomer is used in themanufacture of eclanamine,an antidepressant. What other isomer is obtained?
71.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
H2SO4CH3COCH3CH3CH3OHHOCH3H3Ca.b.OH2SO4CH2CH3OCHOHOHHOCH3COHCH3COHCH3CH3CH3CCH3OCH3CCH
3H2OH2SO4OOHBrHOH2OC(CH3)3C(CH3)3OOHC(CH3)3BrHOH2OC(CH3)3OC(CH3)3OHBrHOH2OC(CH3)3Br2,BRUI12-437_480r3  27-03-2003  11:51 AM  Page 480
481You have now
worked through many
problems that asked you to design the

synthesis of an organic compound. But if

you were actually to go into the laborato-
ry to carry out a synthesis you designed,

how would you know that the compound

you obtained was the one you had set out

to prepare? When a scientist discovers a

new compound with physiological activi-

ty,its structure must be determined. Only

after its structure is known,can methods

to synthesize the compound be designed
and studies to provide insights into its bi-

ological behavior be carried out. Clearly,

chemists need to be able to determine the
structures of compounds.In Chapters13
and 14,you will learn about three
instrumental techniques that chemists use to identify
compounds.Mass spectrometry
is used to determine the molecularmass and the molecular formula of an organic com-

pound and to identify certain structural features of the

compound.Infrared (IR) spectroscopy
is used to determine thekinds of functional groups in an organic compound.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
helps to identify the carbonÐhydrogen framework of an

organic compound.
Identification of OrganicCompoundsPARTFOUR
Chapter 13Mass Spectrometry and InfraredSpectroscopyChapter 14NMR SpectroscopyBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 481
48213Mass Spectrometry andInfrared Spectroscopy2.52.62.72.82.933.544.5
2200240026002800300032003400360038004000It isessential for chemists
to be able to determine

the structures of the com-pounds with which they work.

For example,you learned that

an aldehyde is formed when 

a terminal alkyne undergoes

hydroborationÐoxidation (Sec-tion6.7). But how was it de-

termined that the product of that reaction is actually an aldehyde?Scientists search the world for new compounds with physiological activity. If a
promising compound is found,its structure needs to be determined. Without knowing

its structure,chemists cannot design ways to synthesize the compound,nor can they

undertake studies to provide insights into its biological behavior.
Before the structure of a compound can be determined,the compound must be iso-
lated. For example,if the product of a reaction carried out in the laboratory is to be

identified,it must first be isolated from the solvent and from any unreacted starting

materials,as well as from any side products that might have formed. A compound

found in nature must be isolated from the organism that manufactures it.
Isolating products and determining their structures used to be daunting tasks. The
only tools chemists had to isolate products were distillation (for liquids) and sublima-

tion or fractional recrystallization (for solids). Now a variety of chromatographic tech-

niques allow compounds to be isolated relatively easily. You will learn about these

techniques if you take a laboratory course in organic chemistry.
At one time,identifying an organic compound relied upon determining its molecu-
lar formula by elemental analysis,determining the compound
Õs physical properties (itsmelting point,boiling point,etc.),and simple chemical tests that indicated the presence

(or absence) of certain functional groups. For example,when an aldehyde is added to a

test tube containing a solution of silver oxide in ammonia,a silver mirror is formed on

the inside of the test tube. Only aldehydes do this. If a mirror forms,you can conclude
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 482
Introduction483that the unknown compound is an aldehyde; if a mirror does not form,you know that
the compound is not an aldehyde. Another example of a simple test is the Lucas test,

which distinguishes primary,secondary,and tertiary alcohols by how rapidly the test

solution turns cloudy after the addition of the Lucas reagent (Section12.1). These

procedures were not sufficient to characterize molecules with complex structures,and

because a relatively large sample was needed to carry out all the tests,they were

impractical for the analysis of compounds that were difficult to obtain.
Today,a number of different instrumental techniques are used to identify organic
compounds. These techniques can be performed quickly on small amounts of a com-

pound and can provide much more information about the compound
Õs structure thansimple chemical tests can provide. We have already discussed one such technique:

ultraviolet/visible (UV/Vis) spectroscopy,which provides information about organ-

ic compounds with conjugated double bonds. In this chapter,we will look at two

more instrumental techniques:mass spectrometry and infrared (IR) spectroscopy.

Mass spectrometry
allows us to determine the 
molecular massand the molecularformulaof a compound,as well as certain 
structural features
of the compound.
Infrared spectroscopy
allows us to determine the 
kinds of functional groups
a com-pound has. In the next chapter,we will look at nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)

spectroscopy,which provides information about the carbon
Ðhydrogen framework of
a compound. Of these instrumental techniques,mass spectrometry is the only one

that does not involve electromagnetic radiation. Thus,it is called 
spectrometry
,whereas the others are called spectroscopy.
We will be referring to different classes of organic compounds as we discuss the
various instrumental techniques; these classes are listed in Table13.1. (They are also

listed inside the back cover of the book for easy reference.)
Table 13.1
Classes of Organic CompoundsCCCCH bondsAlkanecontains only C
and CAlkeneCCAlkyneRCHOAldehydeCNNitrileRCROKetoneRCOHOCarboxylic acidRCOROEsterRCNH2OAmidesRCNHROR2NHAmine (secondary)RCNR2OR3NAmine (tertiary)RNH2Amine (primary)Alkyl halideRX
EtherROR
AlcoholAnilineROHX = F, Cl, Br, or IPhenolArNH2ArOHAr  =BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 483
484CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy13.1Mass Spectrometry
At one time,the molecular weight of a compound was determined by its vapor den-
sity or its freezing-point depression,and molecular formulas were determined by

elemental analysis,a technique that determined the relative proportions of the ele-

ments present in the compound. These were long and tedious techniques that re-

quired relatively large amounts of a very pure sample. Today,molecular weights and

molecular formulas can be rapidly determined by mass spectrometry from a very

small amount of a sample.In mass spectrometry,a small sample of a compound is introduced into an instru-
ment called a mass spectrometer,where it is vaporized and then ionized as a result of

an electronÕs being removed from each molecule. Ionization can be accomplished in
several ways. The most common method bombards the vaporized molecules with a

beam of high-energy electrons. The energy of the electron beam can be varied,but a

beam of about 70 electron volts (eV) is commonly used. When the electron beam hits

a molecule,it knocks out an electron,producing a 
molecular ion, which is a 
radicalcationÑa species with an unpaired electron and a positive charge.
Loss of an electron from a molecule weakens the molecule
Õs bonds. Therefore,
many of the molecular ions break apart into cations,radicals,neutral molecules,and

other radical cations. Not surprisingly,the bonds most likely to break are the weakest

ones and those that result in the formation of the most stable products. All the

positively charged fragments
of the molecule pass between two negatively charged
plates,which accelerate the fragments into an analyzer tube (Figure13.1). Neutral
Meelectronmolecular iona radical cationMmoleculeelectronbeamsampleelectronbeamto vacuum pumpmagnetmagnetnegativelycharged
accelerating
and focusing
platespositivelycharged
repeller
plateneutralmoleculespositively charged ions(deflected according to m/z)ion exit slitcollectoranalyzer tuberecorderelectronbeamfilamentneutralmolecules,
neutral fragments,
and negative
ionsFigure 13.1
Schematic of a mass spectrometer. A beam of high-energy electrons causes molecules 
to ionize and fragment. Positively charged fragments pass through the analyzer tube.
Changing the magnetic field strength allows the separation of fragments of varying 
mass-to-charge ratio.BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 484
Section 13.2The Mass Spectrum ¥ Fragmentation
485fragments are not attracted to the negatively charged plates and therefore are not ac-
celerated. They are eventually pumped out of the spectrometer.
The analyzer tube is surrounded by a magnet whose magnetic field deflects the pos-
itively charged fragments in a curved path. At a given magnetic field strength,the de-

gree to which the path is curved depends on the mass-to-charge ratio (
mz) of thefragment:The path of a fragment with a smaller 
mzvalue will bend more than that of
a heavier fragment. In this way,the particles with the same 
mzvalues can be separat-
ed from all the others. If a fragmentÕs path matches the curvature of the analyzer tube,
the fragment will pass through the tube and out the ion exit slit. A collector records the

relative number of fragments with a particular 
mzpassing through the slit. The more
stable the fragment,the more likely it will make it to the collector. The strength of the

magnetic field is gradually increased,so fragments with progressively larger 
mzval-
ues are guided through the tube and out the exit slit.
The mass spectrometer records a 
mass spectrumÑa graph of the relative
abundance of each fragment plotted against its 
mzvalue. Because the charge (
z) onessentially all the fragments that reach the collector plate is 
mzis the molecularmass (m) of the fragment. 
Remember that only positively charged species reach 
the collector.
13.2The Mass Spectrum ¥ FragmentationThe mass spectrum of pentane is shown in Figure13.2. Each 
mzvalue is the
nominal molecular massof the fragment
Ñthe molecular mass to the nearest wholenumber. is defined to have a mass of 12.000 atomic mass units (amu),and the

masses of other atoms are based on this standard. For example,a proton has a mass of

1.007825amu. Pentane,therefore,has a 
molecularmass
of 72.0939 and a 
nominalmolecular massof 72.The peak with the highest 
mzvalue in the spectrum
Ñin this case,at 
Ñis due to the fragment that results when an electron is knocked out of a molecule of

the injected sampleÑin this case,a pentane molecule. In other words,the peak with
the highest mzvalue represents the molecular ion(M) of pentane. (The tiny peak at
will be explained later.) Since it is not known what bond loses the electron,
the molecular ion is put in brackets and the positive charge and unpaired electron are

assigned to the entire structure. 
The mz value of the molecular ion gives the molecu-
lar mass of the compound
. Peaks with smaller mzvalues
Ñcalled fragment ionpeaksÑrepresent positively charged fragments of the molecule.
737212C1,A mass spectrum records only 
positively charged fragments.CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3100500020406080100
Relative abundanceRelativeabundancem/zm/z.52.56
.32
.20
.00
.27
.93
.44
.65
.75
.22
.22
.5601841110055
37
12
26
17
314
27372
71
57
43
42
41
39
29
28
27
15
1415272943 (M-29)
(M-15)
5772base peakmolecular ion (M)Figure 13.2
The mass spectrum of pentane,shown as a bar graph and in tabular
form. The base peak represents the
fragment that appears in greatest
abundance. The value of the

molecular ion gives the molecular
mass of the compound.mzBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 485
486CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyThe way a molecular ion fragmentsdepends on the strength of its bonds

and the stability of the fragments.The base peakis the peak with the greatest intensity,due to its having the greatest
relative abundance. The base peak is assigned a relative intensity of 100%,and the rel-

ative intensity of each of the other peaks is reported as a percentage of the base peak.

Mass spectra can be shown either as bar graphs or in tabular form.
A mass spectrum gives us structural information about the compound because 
themzvalues and the relative abundances of the fragments depend on the strength of the
molecular ionÕs bonds and the stability of the fragments
. Weak bonds break in prefer-
ence to strong bonds,and bonds that break to form more stable fragments break in

preference to those that form less stable fragments.For example,the bonds in the molecular ion formed from pentane have
about the same strength. However,the bond is more likely to break than the
bond because fragmentation leads to a 
primarycarbocationanda 
primaryradical,which together are more stable than the 
primarycarbocationand methylradical (or primaryradical and methylcation) obtained from fragmentation. fragmentation forms ions with or 29,and
fragmentation forms ions with or 15. The base peak of 43 in the
mass spectrum of pentane indicates the preference for fragmentation. (See

Sections7.7and 7.8to review the relative stabilites of carbocations and radicals.)
A method commonly used to identify fragment ions is to determine the difference
between the mzvalue of a given fragment ion and that of the molecular ion. For ex-
ample,the ion with in the mass spectrum of pentane is 29 units smaller than

the molecular ion An ethyl radical has a molecular mass

of 29 (because the mass numbers of C and H are 12 and 1,respectively),so the peak at

43 can be attributed to the molecular ion minus an ethyl radical. Similarly,the peak 

at can be attributed to the molecular ion minus a methyl radical.

Peaks at and are readily recognizable as being due to methyl and

ethyl cations,respectively. AppendixVIcontains a table of common fragment ions

and a table of common fragments lost.Peaks are commonly observed at 
mzvalues one and two units less than the 
mzvalues
of the carbocations because the carbocations can undergo further fragmentation
Ñlosingone or two hydrogen atoms.
2-Methylbutane has the same molecular formula as pentane,so it,too,has a molec-
ular ion with (Figure13.3). Its mass spectrum is similar to that of pentane,

with one notable exception:The peak at is much more intense.
M155772m/z  43m/z  42m/z  41CH3CH2CH2[CH3CHCH2]CH2CH2CHHH2915M1557(CH3CH2)M2943.431        2        3        4        5
molecular ionm/z  72m/z  43[CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3]CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2m/z  29CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2m/z  57CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3m/z  15CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3C-2C-357C-1C-243C-2C-3C-1C-2C-2C-3C-1C-2C-2C-3CCemolecular ionm/z  72electronbeamCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3 [CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3]3-D Molecules:Propane;
Propane radical cationBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 486
2-Methylbutane is more likely than pentane to lose a methyl radical,because,when it
does,a 
secondarycarbocation is formed. In contrast,when pentane loses a methyl
radical,a less stable 
primarycarbocation is formed.PROBLEM 1How could you distinguish the mass spectrum of 2,2-dimethylpropane from those of
pentane and 2-methylbutane?
PROBLEM 2What mzvalue is most likely for the base peak in the mass spectrum of 3-methylpentane?
PROBLEM 3SOLVED
The mass spectra of two very stable cycloalkanes both show a molecular ion peak at
One spectrum shows a base peak at the other shows a base peak at
Identify the cycloalkanes.
SOLUTIONThe molecular formula for a cycloalkane is Because the molecular
mass of both cycloalkanes is 98,their molecular formulas must be 
A base peak of 69 means the loss of an ethyl substituent whereas a base peak of 83 means the loss of a methyl substituent Be-

cause the cycloalkanes are known to be very stable,we can rule out cycloalkanes with three

or four-membered rings. A seven-carbon cycloalkane with a base peak signifying the loss of

an ethyl substituent must be ethylcyclopentane. A seven-carbon cycloalkane with a base

peak signifying the loss of a methyl substituent must be methylcyclohexane.
PROBLEM 4The Ònitrogen ruleÓstates that if a compound has an odd-mass molecular ion,the compound
contains an odd number of nitrogen atoms.a.Calculate the value for the molecular ion of the following compounds:
1.2.
b.Explain why the nitrogen rule holds.
c.State the rule in terms of an even-mass molecular ion.
H2NCH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2CH2NH2988315.986929,841498.712C7H14CH2.83.69,98.molecular ionm/z  72m/z  57[CH3CHCH2CH3]CH3CHCH2CH3CH3CH3Section 13.2The Mass Spectrum 
¥ Fragmentation487CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH3electronbeamelectronbeamm/z  83m/z  69ethyl-cyclopentanemethyl-cyclohexane020406080100
m/z100500Relative abundance152729435772CH3CHCH2CH3CH3Figure 13.3
The mass spectrum of2-methylbutane.BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 487
488CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy13.3Isotopes in Mass Spectrometry
Although the molecular ions of pentane and 2-methylbutane both have 
mzvalues of
72,each spectrum shows a very small peak at (Figures13.2and 13.3). This

peak is called an peak because the ion responsible for it is one unit heavier

than the molecular ion. The peak owes its presence to the fact that there are

two naturally occurring isotopes of carbon:98.89% of natural carbon is and

1.11% is (Section1.1). So 1.11% of the molecular ions contain a instead of a
and therefore appear at Peaks that are attributable to isotopes can help identify the compound responsible
for a mass spectrum. For example,if a compound contains five carbon atoms,the rel-

ative intensity of the ion should be multiplied by the

relative intensity of the molecular ion. This means that the number of carbon atoms

in a compound can be calculated if the relative intensities of both the M and 

peaks are known.
The isotopic distributions of several elements commonly found in organic com-
pounds are shown in Table13.2. From the isotopic distributions,we see why the
peak can be used to determine the number of carbon atoms in a compound:It
is because the contributions to the peak by isotopes of H,O,and the halogens

are very small or nonexistent. This formula does not work as well in predicting the

number of carbon atoms in a nitrogen-containing compound because the natural abun-

dance of is relatively high.
15NM1M1number of carbon atomsrelative intensity of M1 peak.011relative intensity of M peakM151.1%5.011,M1M1.12C13C13C12CM1M173ElementNatural abundance
Carbon98.89%1.11%
Hydrogen99.99%0.01%
Nitrogen99.64%0.36%
Oxygen99.76%0.04%0.20%
Sulfur95.0%0.76%4.22%0.02%
Fluorine100%Chlorine75.77%24.23%
Bromine50.69%49.31%
Iodine100%127I81Br79Br37Cl35Cl19F36S34S33S32S18O17O16O15N14N2H1H13C12CTable 13.2The Natural Abundance of Isotopes Commonly Found 
in Organic CompoundsBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 488
Section 13.4Determination of Molecular Formulas: High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
489Mass spectra can show peaks as a result of a contribution from or from
having two heavy isotopes in the same molecule (say,and or two ). Most

of the time,the peak is very small. The presence of a large peak is

evidence of a compound containing either chlorine or bromine,because each of these

elements has a high percentage of a naturally occurring isotope that is two units

heavier than the most abundant isotope. From the natural abundance of the isotopes of

chlorine and bromine in Table13.2,one can conclude that if the peak is one-

third the height of the molecular ion peak,then the compound contains one chlorine

atom because the natural abundance of is one-third that of If the M and
peaks are about the same height,then the compound contains one bromine
atom because the natural abundances of and are about the same.
In calculating the molecular masses of molecular ions and fragments,the 
atomicmassof a single isotope of the atom must be used (or 37,etc.); the 
atomicweightsin the periodic table cannot be used because they are the
weighted averages
of all the naturally occurring isotopes for that element,and mass
spectrometry measures the mzvalue of an 
individualfragment.PROBLEM 5The mass spectrum of an unknown compound has a molecular ion peak with a relative
intensity of 43.27% and an peak with a relative intensity of 3.81%. How many

carbon atoms are in the compound?13.4Determination of Molecular Formulas:High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
All the mass spectra shown in this text were determined with a low-resolution mass
spectrometer. Such spectrometers give the 
nominal molecular massof a fragmentÑthe mass to the nearest whole number. High-resolution mass spectrometers can de-

termine the exact molecular mass
of a fragment to a precision of 0.0001 amu. If we
know the exact molecular mass of the molecular ion,we can determine the com-

poundÕs molecular formula. For example,as the following listing shows,many com-
pounds have a nominal molecular mass of 122 amu,but each of them has a different

exact molecular mass.
Some Compounds with a Nominal Molecular Mass of 122 amu and Their Exact
Molecular MassesMolecular formula
Exact molecular mass (amu)122.1096122.0845122.0732122.0368122.0579122.0225
The exact molecular masses of some common isotopes are listed in Table13.3. Some
computer programs can determine the molecular formula of a compound from the

compoundÕs exact molecular mass.
C4H10S2C4H10O4C7H6O2C8H10OC7H10N2C9H14M1Cl35.453Cl3581Br79BrM235Cl.37ClM2M2M213CÕs2H,13C18OM2Table 13.3The Exact Masses of Some Common Isotopes
IsotopeMassIsotopeMass
1.007825amu31.9721amu
13.00000amu34.9689amu

14.0031amu78.9183amu

15.9949amu
16O79Br14N35Cl12C32S1HBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 489
490CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyPROBLEM 6Which molecular formula has an exact molecular mass of 86.1096amu:
or 13.5Fragmentation at Functional Groups
Characteristic fragmentation patterns are associated with specific functional groups;
these can help identify a substance based on its mass spectrum. The patterns were rec-

ognized after the mass spectra of many compounds containing a particular functional

group were studied. We will look at the fragmentation patterns of alkyl halides,ethers,

alcohols,and ketones as examples.
Alkyl HalidesLetÕslook first at the mass spectrum of 1-bromopropane,shown in Figure13.4. The
relative heights of the M and peaks are about equal,so we can conclude that

the compound contains a bromine atom. Electron bombardment is most likely to

dislodge a lone-pair electron if the molecule has any,because a molecule does not hold

onto its lone-pair electrons as tightly as it holds onto its bonding electrons. Thus,

electron bombardment dislodges one of bromineÕs lone-pair electrons.The weakest bond in the resulting molecular ion is the bond (the 
bond dissociation energy is 69 kcal/mol; the bond dissociation energy is 85

kcal/mol; see Table3.1on p. 129). The bond breaks heterolytically,with both elec-

trons going to the more electronegative of the atoms that were joined by the bond,

forming a propyl cation and a bromine atom. As a result,the base peak in the mass

spectrum of 1-bromopropane is at or The

propyl cation has the same fragmentation pattern it exhibited when it was formed from

the cleavage of pentane (Figure13.2).
M281].[M79,43CCCBrCBrM2C4H6O2 ?C4H10N2,C6H14,Tutorial:
Fragmentation of alkyl halidesCH3CH2CH2Brm/z1008060
4020102030405060708090100110120130
Relative abundance15274143122124Figure 13.4
The mass spectrum of1-bromopropane.m/z  122CH3CH2CH2Brem/z  124CH3CH2CH2Brm/z  43CH3CH2CH2Br1-bromopropaneBrCH3CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2BrThe mass spectrum of 2-chloropropane is shown in Figure13.5. We know thatthe
compound contains a chlorine atom,because the peak is one-third the height

of the molecular ion peak. The base peak at results from 
heterolytic cleav-
ageof the bond. The peaks at and have a ratio,indi-
cating that these fragments contain a chlorine atom. They result from 
homolyticcleavage
of a bond at the carbon (the carbon bonded to the chlorine). This
cleavage,known as ,occurs because the  (82 kcal/mol) and C
CCClA cleavageaCC3:16563CCl43M2BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 490
(85 kcal/mol) bonds have similar strengths,and the species that is formed is a relative-
ly stable cation,since its positive charge is shared by two atoms:
Notice that cleavage does not occur in alkyl bromides be-
cause the bond is much weaker than the bond.
PROBLEM 7Sketch the mass spectrum of 1-chloropropane.
EthersThe mass spectrum of sec-butyl isopropyl ether is shown in Figure13.6. The fragmen-
tation pattern of an ether is similar to that of an alkyl halide.
1.Electronbombardment dislodges one of the lone-pair electrons from oxygen.
2.Fragmentation of the resulting molecular ion occurs in two principal ways:
a.A bond is cleaved heterolytically,with the electrons going to the more
electronegative oxygen atom.
COm/z  78Cleem/z  43CH3CHCH3CH3CH3CHCH3ClCH3CH2-chloropropaneCH3m/z  80ClCH3CHCH3m/z  78ClCH3CHCH3m/z  80ClCH3CHCH3m/z  63ClCH3CHm/z  65ClCH3CHClCH3CHCH3ClClheterolyticcleavagehomolyticcleavageCBrCCaCH3CHCl    .   CH3 CHCl    Section 13.5Fragmentation at Functional Groups
491CH3CHCH3Clm/z1005000102030405060708090100
Relative abundance414363657880Figure 13.5
The mass spectrum of2-chloropropane.Recall that an arrowhead with 
one barb represents the movement 

of one electron.
3-D Molecules:Isopropyl cation; 
2-Chloropropane; 
2-Chloropropane radical
cationTutorial:
Fragmentation of ethersBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 491
492CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopym/z100500010203040506070809010011012
0Relative abundance41435787101116CH3CH2CHCHCH
3OCH3CH3Figure 13.6
The mass spectrum of sec-butylisopropyl ether.
b.A bond is cleaved 
homolyticallyat the position because it leads to a
relatively stable cation in which the positive charge is shared by two atoms 

(a carbon and an oxygen). The alkyl group leading to the most stable radical

is one most easily cleaved. Thus,the peak at is more abundant than

the one at even though the compound has three methyl groups

bonded to carbons that can be cleaved to produce a peak at 

because a primary radical is more stable than a methyl radical.PROBLEM 8The mass spectra of 1-methoxybutane,2-methoxybutane,and 2-methoxy-2-methylpropane
are shown in Figure13.7. Match the compounds with the spectra.
AlcoholsThe molecular ions obtained from alcohols fragment so readily that few of them
survive to reach the collector. As a result,the mass spectra of alcohols show small

molecular ion peaks. Notice the small molecular ion peak at in the mass

spectrum of 2-hexanol (Figure13.8).
Like alkyl halides and ethers,alcohols undergo cleavage. Consequently,the mass
spectrum of 2-hexanol shows a base peak at (cleavage leading to a more
a45a102CHCH3CH3CH2CHO
CH3CH3 cleavagem/z  87CH3CH2CHCH3CHO
CH3CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CHO
CH3CH3 cleavagem/z  101CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CHO
CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CHO
CH3CH3 cleavagem/z  101CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CHO
CH3 carbon101,a101,87aCC3-D Molecules:Methyl propyl ether;
Methyl propyl ether radical
cationm/z  116CH3CH2CH    O    CHCH3eCH3CH3CH3CH2CH    O    CHCH3CH3CH3m/z  57CH3CH2CHO    CHCH
3CH3CH3m/z  43CH3CH2CH    OCHCH
3CH3CH3sec-butyl isopropyl etherBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 492
Section 13.5Fragmentation at Functional Groups
493m/z010203040506070809010
01008060
40
200Relative abundancem/z010203040506070809010
01008060
40200Relative abundancem/z010203040506070809010
0100806040
200Relative abundance5773a.b.c.59734556Figure 13.7
The mass spectra for Problem8.
stable butyl radical) and a smaller peak at (cleavage leading to a less
stable methyl radical).a87 carbonm/z  1022-hexanolCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3eOHCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3m/z  45CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CHOH
OHm/z  87CH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH
3OH cleavage cleavageBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 493
494CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopym/zCH3CH2CH2CH2CHCH3OH10080
60
40
200020406080100120
Relative abundance45698487573127m/z  102Figure 13.8
The mass spectrum of 2-hexanol.Tutorial:
Fragmentation of alcoholsIn all the fragmentations we have seen so far,only one bond is broken. An impor-
tant fragmentation occurs in alcohols,however,that involves breaking two bonds. Two

bonds break because the fragmentation forms a stable water molecule. The water that

is eliminated comes from the OH group of the alcohol and a hydrogen. Thus,

alcohols show a fragmentation peak at because of loss of water.
Noticethat alkyl halides,ethers,and alcohols have the following fragmentation
behavior in common:
1.A bond between carbon and a 
more electronegative
atom (a halogen or an
oxygen) breaks heterolytically.
2.A bond between carbon and an atom of 
similar electronegativity
(a carbon or ahydrogen) breaks homolytically.
3.The bonds most likely to break are the weakest bonds and those that lead to for-
mation of the most stable cation. (Look for fragmentation that results in a cation
with a positive charge shared by two atoms.)
PROBLEM 9Primary alcohols have a strong peak at What fragment is responsible for this peak?
KetonesThemass spectrum of a ketone generally has an intense molecular ion peak. Ketones

fragment homolytically at the bond adjacent to the bond,which results

in the formation of a cation with a positive charge shared by two atoms. The alkyl

group leading to the more stable radical is the one that is more easily cleaved.
If one of the alkyl groups attached to the carbonyl carbon has a hydrogen,a
cleavage known as a 
McLafferty rearrangement
may occur. In this rearrangement,
gm/z  862-pentanoneCH3CH2CH2CCH3eOCH3CH2CH2CCH3m/z  43CH3CH2CH2CH3COOm/z  71CH3CH2CH2CCH
3OCOCC31.m/z  (102  18) 84CH3CH2CHCH2CHCH3OHCH3CH2CHCH2CHCH3HH2OM18g3-D Molecules:2-Hexanone; 
2-Hexanone radical cation;
Acetone enol radical cationBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 494
Section 13.5Fragmentation at Functional Groups
495Fred Warren McLafferty
was bornin Evanston,Illinois,in 1923. He

received a B.S. and an M.S. from the

University of Nebraska,and a Ph.D.

from Cornell University in 1950. He

was a scientist at Dow Chemical
Company until he joined the faculty
at Purdue University in 1964. He has

been a professor of chemistry at

Cornell University since 1968.
the bond between the carbon and the carbon breaks homolytically and a
hydrogen atom from the carbon migrates to the oxygen atom. Again,fragmenta-

tion has occurred in a way that produces a cation with a positive charge shared by

two atoms.
PROBLEM 10How could their mass spectra distinguish the following compounds?
PROBLEM 11Identify the ketones that are responsible for the mass spectra shown in Figure13.9.
CH3CH2CCH2CH3OCH3CCH2CH2CH3OCH3CCHCH3OCH3m/z  86m/z  58CH2CCH
3OH2CCH
2CH2McLaffertyrearrangementCCH
3OHH2CH2CHgbaTutorial:
Fragmentation of ketonesm/zm/z020406080100120
020406080100120
10080
60
40
200Relative abundance10080
60
40
200Relative abundanceb.43718658a.298657Figure 13.9
The mass spectra for Problem11.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 495
PROBLEM 12Using curved arrows,show the principal fragments that would be observed in the mass
spectrum of each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 13Two products are obtained from the reaction of (
Z)-2-pentene with water and a trace of
The mass spectra of these products are shown in Figure13.10. Identify the com-
pounds responsible for the spectra.H2SO4.CH3CH3CH3CBr
OHCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CHClOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2OCCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH496CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy020406080100120
020406080100120
10080
60
40
200594527413110080
60
40
2002731557345m/zm/zb.a.Relative abundanceRelative abundanceFigure 13.10
The mass spectra for Problem13.
The molecular ion and the pattern of fragment ion peaks are unique for each com-
pound. A mass spectrum,therefore,is like a fingerprint of the compound. A positive

identification of a compound can be made by comparing its mass spectrum with that of

a known sample of the compound.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 496
Section 13.6Spectroscopy and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
49713.6Spectroscopy and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
Spectroscopy
is the study of the interaction of matter and electromagnetic radiation
.Electromagnetic radiation
is radiant energy having the properties of both particles and
waves. A continuum of different types of electromagnetic radiation
Ñeach type associatedwith a particular energy range
Ñconstitutes the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure13.11).
Visible light is the type of electromagnetic radiation with which we are most familiar,but

it represents only a fraction of the range of the entire electromagnetic spectrum. X-rays

and radio waves are other types of familiar electromagnetic radiation.
Each of the spectroscopic techniques used to identify compounds that are
discussed in this book employs a different type of electromagnetic radiation. You

were introduced to ultraviolet/visible (UV/Vis) spectroscopy in Chapter8. In the

current chapter we will look at infrared (IR) spectroscopy,and in the next chapter

we will see how compounds can be identified using nuclear magnetic resonance

(NMR) spectroscopy.
A particle of electromagnetic radiation is called a photon. We may think of electro-
magnetic radiation as photons traveling at the speed of light. Because electromagnetic

radiation has both particle-like and wave-like properties,it can be characterized by ei-

ther its frequency or its wavelength 
Frequency
is defined as the number of
wave crests that pass by a given point in one second. Frequency has units of hertz

(Hz). Wavelength
is the distance from any point on one wave to the corresponding
point on the next wave. Wavelength is generally measured in micrometers or nanome-

ters. One micrometer is of a meter; one nanometer (nm) is of a meter.
The frequency of electromagnetic radiation,therefore,is equal to the speed of light
(c) divided by the radiation
Õs wavelength:
Short wavelenths have high frequencies,and long wavelengths have low frequencies.
nl 31010 cmswavelength ()109106mml.n1019106104Frequency (v) in Hz-rays101710131010105X-raysMicrowaves
1010.40.810
61010102Wavelength () in m1015Radio wavesNMRUltravioletlightCosmicraysInfraredradiationVisiblelighthigh
frequencyshort
wavelengthlow
frequencylong
wavelengthFigure 13.11
The electromagnetic spectrum.BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 497
498CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyThe relationship between the energy (
E) of a photon and the frequency (or the
wavelength) of the electromagnetic radiation is described by the equation
where his the proportionality constant called Planck
Õs constant,named after the Ger-
man physicist who discovered the relationship (Section3.7). The electromagnetic

spectrum is made up of the following components:
¥Cosmic rays
,which consist of radiation discharged by the sun,have the highest
energy,the highest frequencies,and the shortest wavelengths.
¥(gamma rays) are emitted from the nuclei of certain radioactive elements
and,because of their high energy,can severely damage biological organisms.
¥X-rays,
somewhat lower in energy than are less harmful,except in high
doses. Low-dose X-rays are used to examine the internal structure of organisms.

The denser the tissue,the more it blocks X-rays.
¥Ultraviolet (UV) light
is responsible for sunburns,and repeated exposure can
cause skin cancer by damaging DNA molecules in skin cells (Section29.6).
¥Visible light
is the electromagnetic radiation we see.¥We feel 
infrared radiation
as heat.¥We cook with 
microwaves
and use them in radar.
¥Radio waveshave the lowest energy (lowest frequency). We use them for radio
and television communication,digital imaging,remote controls,and wireless

linkages for laptop computers. Radio waves are also used in NMR spectroscopy

and in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Chapter14).
Wavenumber
is another way to describe the 
frequency
of electromagnetic
radiation,and the one most often used in infrared spectroscopy. It is the number of

waves in one centimeter,so it has units of reciprocal centimeters Scientists

use wavenumbers in preference to wavelengths because,unlike wavelengths,

wavenumbers are directly proportional to energy. The relationship between wavenum-

ber and wavelength is given by the equation
So high frequencies,large wavenumbers,
and short wavelengthsare associated withhigh energy.
PROBLEM 14a.Which is higher in energy per photon,electromagnetic radiation with wavenumber
or with wavenumber 
b.Which is higher in energy per photon,electromagnetic radiation with wavelength 
or with wavelength 
c.Which is higher in energy per photon,electromagnetic radiation with wavenumber
or with wavelength 
PROBLEM 15a.Radiation of what wavenumber has a wavelength of 
b.Radiation of what wavelength has a wavenumber of 200
 cm1?4 mm?2 mm?3000 cm18 mm?9 mm2000 cm1?100 cm1ncm1104lmm(because 1 mm104 cm)(in mm)(in cm1)cm1.ng-rays,g-nlHigh frequencies, large wavenumbers,
and short wavelengths are associated

with high energy.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 498
HCl
a stretching vibration
Section 13.7Infrared Spectroscopy
49913.7Infrared Spectroscopy
Stretching and Bending Vibrations
The covalent bonds in molecules are constantly vibrating. So when we say that a bond
between two atoms has a certain length,we are specifying an average because the

bond behaves as if it were a vibrating spring connecting two atoms. A bond vibrates

with both stretching and bending motions. A 
stretch
is a vibration occurring along theline of the bond that changes the bond length. A 
bendis a vibration that does 
notoccuralong the line of the bond,but changes the bond angle. A diatomic molecule such as
can undergo only a 
stretching vibration
since it has no bond angles.The vibrations of a molecule containing three or more atoms are more complex
(Figure13.12). Such molecules can experience symmetric and asymmetric stretches

and bends,and their bending vibrations can be either in-plane or out-of-plane.

Bending vibrationsare often referred to by the descriptive terms 
rock,scissor,wag,
and twist.HClTutorial:
IR stretching and bendingStretching vibrations
symmetric stretchasymmetric stretch
Bending vibrationssymmetric in-planebend (scissor)asymmetric in-planebend (rock)
symmetric out-of-planebend (twist)asymmetric out-of-planebend (wag)CCCHHHHHHCCCHHHHHHFigure 13.12
Stretching and bending vibrationsof bonds in organic molecules.Each stretching and bending vibration of a bond in a molecule occurs with acharacteristic frequency. When a compound is bombarded with radiation of a fre-

quency that exactly matches the frequency of one of its vibrations,the molecule will

absorb energy. This allows the bonds to stretch and bend a bit more. Thus,the ab-

sorption of energy increases the 
amplitudeof the vibration,but does not change its
frequency
. By experimentally determining the wavenumbers of the energy absorbed
by a particular compound,we can ascertain what kinds of bonds it has. For example,

the stretching vibration of a bond absorbs energy of wavenumber
whereas the stretching vibration of an bond absorbs energy of
wavenumber (Figure13.13).
COOH
1700 cm13450 cm13450 cm1OH1700 cm1,COBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 499
500CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.567
Wavelength (m)8910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavenumber (cm1)CH3CCH2CCH3CH3OOHOH% TransmittanceOC0100Figure 13.13
The infrared spectrum of 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-pentanone.Obtaining an Infrared Spectrum
The instrument used to obtain an 
infrared spectrum
is called an IR spectrometer
. Aninfrared spectrum
is obtained by passing infrared radiation through a sample of the
compound. A detector generates a plot of percent transmission of radiation versus the

wavenumber (or wavelength) of the radiation transmitted (Figure 13.13). At 100%

transmission,all the energy of the radiation passes through the molecule. Lower

values of percent transmission mean that some of the energy is being absorbed by the

compound. Each downward spike in the IR spectrum represents absorption of energy.

The spikes are called 
absorption bands
. Most chemists report the location of absorp-tion bands using wavenumbers.
A newer type of IR spectrometer,called a Fourier transform IR (FT-IR) spectrome-
ter,has several advantages. Its sensitivity is better because,instead of scanning

through the frequences,it measures all frequencies simultaneously. With a conven-

tional IR spectrometer,it can take 2 to 10 minutes to scan through all the frequencies.

In contrast,FT-IR spectra can be taken in 1 to 2 seconds. The information is digitized

and Fourier transformed by a computer to produce the FT-IR spectrum. The spectra

shown in this text are FT-IR spectra.
An IR spectrum can be taken of a gas,a solid,or a liquid sample. Gases are ex-
panded into an evacuated cell (a small container). Solids can be compressed with an-

hydrous KBr into a disc that is placed in the light beam. Solids can also be examined

as mulls. A mull is prepared by grinding a few milligrams of the solid in a mortar.

Then a drop or two of mineral oil is added and the grinding continued. In the case of

liquid samples,a spectrum can be obtained of the neat (undiluted) liquid by placing a

few drops of it between two optically polished plates of NaCl that are placed in the

light beam. Alternatively,a small container (called a cell) with optically polished NaCl

or AgCl windows is used to hold samples dissolved in solvents. Ionic substances with-

out covalent bonds are used for discs,plates,and cells because they don
Õt absorb IR ra-diation. (Glass,quartz,and plastics have IR-absorbing covalent bonds.)
When solutions are used,they must be in solvents that have few absorption bands in
the region of interest. Commonly used solvents are and In a double-

beam spectrophotometer,the IR radiation is split into two beams
Ñone that passesthrough the sample cell and the other that passes through a cell containing only the
solvent. Any absorptions of the solvent are thus canceled out,so the absorption spec-

trum is that of the solute alone.The Functional Group and Fingerprint Regions
Electromagnetic radiation with wavenumbers from 4000 to has just the right

energy to correspond to the stretching and bending vibrations of organic molecules.

Electromagnetic radiation in this energy range is known as 
infrared radiation
be-cause it is just below the 
Òred region
Óof visible light. (Infra
is Latin for Òbelow.
Ó)600 cm1CHCl3.CH2Cl2BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 500
Section 13.8Characteristic Infrared Absorption Bands
501Wavelength (m)Wavelength (m)2200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavenumber (cm1)Wavenumber (cm1)02.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.51002.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% Transmittance% Transmittance0100a.b.CH3CH2CHCH2CH3OHCH3CHCH2CH2CH3OHFigure 13.14
The IR spectra of (a)2-pentanol and
(b)3-pentanol. The functional

group regions are very similar
because the two compounds have
the same functional group, but the
fingerprint regions are unique for
each compound.An IR spectrum can be divided into two areas. The left-hand two-thirds of an IR
spectrum is where most of the functional groups show absorption

bands. This region is called the 
functional group region
. The right-hand third
of the IR spectrum is called the 
fingerprint region
because it ischaracteristic of the compound as a whole,just as a fingerprint is characteristic of an

individual. Even if two different molecules have the same functional groups,their IR

spectra will not be identical,since the functional groups are not in exactly the same en-

vironment; this difference is reflected in the pattern of absorption bands in the finger-

print regions. Each compound shows a unique pattern in this region. For example,

2-pentanol and 3-pentanol have the same functional groups,so they show similar ab-

sorption bands in the functional group region. Their fingerprint regions are different,

however,because the compounds are different (Figure13.14). Thus a compound can

be positively identified by comparing its fingerprint region with the fingerprint region

of the spectrum of a known sample of the compound.
13.8Characteristic Infrared Absorption Bands
The stretching and bending vibrations of each bond in a molecule can give rise to an
absorption band,so IR spectra can be quite complex. Organic chemists generally do

not try to identify all the absorption bands in an IR spectrum. In this chapter,we will

look at some characteristic bands so that you will be able to tell something about the

structure of a compound that gives a particular IR spectrum. However,there is a lot

more to infrared spectroscopy than we will be able to cover. You can find an extensive

table of characteristic group frequencies in AppendixVI. When identifying an un-

known compound,one often uses IR spectroscopy in conjunction with information ob-

tained from other spectroscopic techniques. Many of the problems in this chapter and
1400Ð600 cm14000Ð1400 cm1BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 501
502CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopyin Chapter14give you the opportunity to identify compounds,using information from
two or more instrumental methods.
Because it takes more energy to stretch a bond than to bend it,absorption bands
for stretching vibrations are found in the functional group region 

whereas absorption bands for bending vibrations are typically found in the fingerprint

region Stretching vibrations,therefore,are the most useful vibra-

tions in determining what kinds of bonds a molecule has. The IR 
stretching
frequencies
associated with different types of bonds are shown in Table13.4and will
be discussed in Sections13.10and 13.11.
1400Ð600 cm1.4000Ð1400 cm1,It takes more energy to stretch
a bond than to bend it.Table 13.4
Important IR Stretching Frequencies
Type of bondWavenumber
 (cm1)Intensity
CN2260
Ð2220CC2260
Ð2100CC1680
Ð1600~1600 and ~1500Ð1430CO1780
Ð1650CO1250
Ð1050CN1230
Ð1020OH3650
Ð3200(alcohol)OH3300
Ð2500NH3500
Ð3300(carboxylic acid)CH3300
Ð2700mediummedium to weakmediumCN1650
Ð1550medium
strong to weakstrongstrongmediumstrong, broadstrong, very broad
medium, broadmediumThe greater the change in dipole
moment, the more intense the

absorption.13.9The Intensity of Absorption BandsThe intensity of an absorption band depends on the size of the change in dipole mo-
ment associated with the vibration:The greater the change in dipole moment,the more

intense the absorption. Recall that the dipole moment of a bond is equal to the magni-

tude of the charge on one of the bonded atoms,multiplied by the distance between the

two charges (Section1.3). When the bond stretches,the increasing distance between

the atoms increases the dipole moment. The stretching vibration of an bond will

be associated with a greater change in dipole moment than that of an bond

because the bond is more polar. Consequently,the stretching vibration of the
bond will be more intense. Likewise,the stretching vibration of an bond
is more intense than that of a bond because the bond is more polar.
HCHNHOrelative bond polaritiesrelative intensities of IR absorptionincreasing polarityincreasing intensityNHCHNHOHOHNHOHBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 502
Section 13.10The Position of Absorption Bands
503The intensity of an absorption band also depends on the number of bonds responsi-
ble for the absorption. For example,the absorption band for the stretch will be

more intense for a compound such as octyl iodide,which has bonds,than

for methyl iodide,which has only three bonds. The concentration of the sample

used to obtain an IR spectrum also affects the intensity of the absorption bands. Con-

centrated samples have greater numbers of absorbing molecules and,therefore,more

intense absorption bands. In the chemical literature,you will find intensities referred

to as strong (s),medium (m),weak (w),broad,and sharp.
PROBLEM 16Which would be expected to be more intense,the stretching vibration of a bond or
the stretching vibration of a bond?
13.10The Position of Absorption BandsHookeÕs LawThe amount of energy required to stretch a bond depends on the 
strength
of the bond
and the massesof the bonded atoms. The stronger the bond,the greater the energy
required to stretch it,because a stronger bond corresponds to a tighter spring. The

frequency of the vibration is inversely related to the mass of the atoms attached to the

spring,so heavier atoms vibrate at lower frequencies.
The approximate wavenumber of an absorption can be calculated from the
following equation derived from 
HookeÕs law
,which describes the motion of a vi-
brating spring:The equation relates the wavenumber of the stretching vibration to the force con-
stant of the bond (
f) and the masses of the atoms (in grams) joined by the bond 
and The force constant is a measure of the strength of the bond. The equation

shows that 
stronger bonds
and lighter atomsgive rise to higher frequencies.
2).(1nn12p 121 212cthe speed of lightCCCOCH17 CHCHTHE ORIGINATOR OF 
HOOKEÕS LAW
Robert Hooke (1635
Ð1703) was born on the Isle
of Wight off the southern coast of England. A brilliant scientist,

he contributed to almost every field of science. He was the first

to suggest that light had wave-like properties. He discovered

that Gamma Arietis is a double star,and he also discovered

JupiterÕs Great Red Spot. In a lecture published posthumously,
he suggested that earthquakes are caused by the cooling and

contracting of the Earth. He examined cork under a microscope

and coined the term ÒcellÓto describe what he saw. He wrote
about evolutionary development based on his studies of micro-

scopic fossils,and his studies of insects were highly regarded as

well. Hooke also invented the balance spring for watches and

the universal joint currently used in cars.
Robert HookeÕs drawing of aÒblue flyÓ appeared inMicrographia, the first book onmicroscopy, published by

Hooke in 1665.Lighter atoms show absorption bands atlarger wavenumbers.700 cm1CCl1100 cm1CO2200 cm1CD3000 cm1CHStronger bonds show absorption bands
at larger wavenumbers.1100 cm1CN1600 cm1CN2200 cm1CNEffect of Bond Order
Bond order affects bond strength,so bond order affects the position of absorption
bands. A bond is stronger than a bond,so a bond stretches at a

higher frequency than does a bond C
C1650 cm1.CC2100 cm1CCCCCCBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 503
bonds show stretching vibrations in the region from 1200 to but these
vibrations are weak and of little value in identifying compounds. Similarly,a 

bond stretches at a higher frequency than does a bond
and a bond stretches at a higher frequency than
does a bond which in turn stretches at a higher frequency than

does a bond (Table13.4).
PROBLEM 17a.Which will occur at a larger wavenumber?
1.a stretch or a stretch

2.a stretch or a bend

3.a stretch or a stretch
b.Assuming that the force constants are the same,which will occur at a largerwavenumber?
1.a stretch or a stretch

2.a stretch or a stretch
Resonance and Inductive Electronic Effects
Table13.4shows a range of wavenumbers for each stretch because the exact position
of the absorption band depends on other structural features of the molecule,such as

electron delocalization,the electronic effect of neighboring substituents,and hydrogen

bonding. Important details about the structure of a compound can be revealed by the

exact position of the absorption band.
For example,the IR spectrum in Figure13.15shows that the carbonyl group 
of 2-pentanone absorbs at whereas the IR spectrum in Figure13.16

shows that the carbonyl group of 2-cyclohexenone absorbs at a lower frequency
2-Cyclohexenone absorbs at a lower frequency because the carbonyl group
has less double-bond character due to electron delocalization. Because a single bond is

weaker than a double bond,a carbonyl group with significant single-bond character will

stretch at a lower frequency than will one with little or no single-bond character.
OO2-pentanoneCH3CCH2CH2CH3OCOat 1720cm12-cyclohexenoneCOat 1680cm11680 cm1.1720 cm1,COCCCOCClCOCNCNCHCHCCCC1100 cm1CN1600 cm1,CN2200 cm1CN1100 cm1,CO1700 cm1CO800 cm1,504CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)CH3CCH2CH2CH3O% TransmittanceOCFigure 13.15
The IR spectrum of 2-pentanone. The intense absorption band at 1720 indicates a
bond.COBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 504
Section 13.10The Position of Absorption Bands
5052.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceOCOFigure 13.16
The IR spectrum of 2-cyclohexenone. Electron delocalization gives its carbonyl group lessdouble-bond character, so it absorbs at a lower frequency than does a

carbonyl group with localized electrons (
1720 cm1).(1680 cm1)Putting an atom other than carbon next to the carbonyl group also causes the position
of the carbonyl absorption band to shift. Whether it shifts to a lower or to a higher

frequency depends on whether the predominant effect of the atom is to donate electrons

by resonance or to withdraw electrons inductively.
The predominant effect of the nitrogen of an amide (Figure13.17) is electron dona-
tion by resonance. Therefore,the carbonyl group of an amide has less double-bond

character than does the carbonyl group of a ketone,so it is weaker and stretches more

easily In contrast,the predominant effect of the oxygen of an ester is in-

ductive electron withdrawal,so the resonance contributor with the single bond

contributes less to the hybrid. The carbonyl group of an ester,therefore,has more dou-

ble-bond character than does the carbonyl group of a ketone,so the former is stronger

and harder to stretch (Figure13.18).
1740 cm1CO1660 cm1.OOCZRCRZresonance electron donationOCZRinductive electron withdrawal2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceCH3CH2CN(CH3)2OCOFigure 13.17
The IR spectrum of N,N-dimethylpropanamide. The carbonyl group of an amide has lessdouble-bond character than does the carbonyl group of a ketone, so the former stretches
more easily (
1660 cm1).BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 505
506CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceCH3CH2CH2COCH2CH3OCOCOFigure 13.18
The IR spectrum of ethyl butanoate. The electron-withdrawing oxygen atom makes thecarbonyl group of an ester harder to stretch than the carbonyl group of a

ketone (1720 cm1).(1740 cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceCH3(CH2)4CH2OH(CH2)5OCHOFigure 13.19
The IR spectrum of 1-hexanol.A bond shows a stretch between 1250 and If the bond is
in an alcohol (Figure13.19) or an ether,the stretch will occur toward the lower end of

the range. If,however,the bond is in a carboxylic acid (Figure13.20),the

stretch will occur at the higher end of the range. The position of the absorption

varies because the bond in an alcohol is a pure single bond,whereas the 

bond in a carboxylic acid has partial double-bond character that is due to resonance

electron donation. Esters show stretches at both ends of the range (Figure13.18)

because esters have two single bonds
Ñone that is a pure single bond and onethat has partial double-bond character.
COCOCOCOCOCOCO1050 cm1.COCH3CH3CH3CH2OHO~1050 cm1CH3CH2CH2CH3O~1050 cm1COH~1250 cm1~1250 cm1 and ~1050 cm1CH3OCOHCH3OCOCH3OCOCH3PROBLEM 18Which will occur at a larger wavenumber?
a.the stretch of an amine or the stretch of an amide
b.the stretch of phenol or the stretch of cyclohexanol

c.the stretch of a ketone or the stretch of an amide

d.the stretch or the bend of the bond in ethanol
COCOCOCOCOCNCNBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 506
PROBLEM 19Which would show an absorption band at a larger wavenumber:a carbonyl group bonded
to an hybridized carbon or a carbonyl group bonded to an hybridized carbon?
PROBLEM 20List the following compounds in order of decreasing wavenumber of the absorption

band:a.b.c.OCH3CCH
3OCH3CHOHCHOOOOOOOOOONHCOsp2sp3Section 13.10The Position of Absorption Bands
507OCOCCH3CH2CH2CH2COHOWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceHCHOFigure 13.20
The IR spectrum of pentanoic acid.Absorption Bandsabsorption bands are easy to detect. Polar bonds show intense absorp-
tion bands and the bands are quite broad (Figures13.19and 13.20). The position and

the breadth of an absorption band depend on the concentration of the solu-

tion. The more concentrated the solution,the more likely it is for the OH-containing

molecules to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds. It is easier to stretch an 

bond if it is hydrogen bonded,because the hydrogen is attracted to the oxygen of a

neighboring molecule. Therefore,the stretch of a concentrated (hydrogen-

bonded) solution of an alcohol occurs at 3550 to whereas the 

stretch of a dilute solution (with little or no hydrogen bonding) occurs at 3650 to
Hydrogen-bonded OH groups also have broader absorption bands
because the hydrogen bonds vary in strength (Section2.9). The absorption bands of

non-hydrogenÐbonded OH groups are sharper.
concentrated solution3550Ð3200 cm1dilute solution3650Ð3590 cm1HHOORHORRhydrogen bond3590 cm1.OH3200 cm1,OHOHOHOHOHOHBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 507
508CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyPROBLEM 21Which will show an stretch at a higher wavenumber,ethanol dissolved in carbon
disulfide or an undiluted sample of ethanol?
13.11Absorption BandsStretching Vibrations
The strength of a bond depends on the hybridization of the carbon:The greater the
scharacter of the carbon,the stronger the bond it forms (Section1.14). Therefore,a
bond is stronger when the carbon is 
sphybridized than when it is hybridized,
which in turn is stronger than when the carbon is hybridized. More energy is needed

to stretch a stronger bond,and this is reflected in the stretch absorption bands,

which occur at if the carbon is 
sphybridized,at if the carbon
is hybridized,and at if the carbon is hybridized (Table13.5).
A useful step in the analysis of a spectrum entails looking at the absorption bandsin
the vicinity of Figures13.21,13.22,and 13.23show the IR spectra for

methylcyclohexane,cyclohexene,and ethylbenzene,respectively. The only absorption

band in the vicinity of in Figure13.21is slightly to the right of that value.

This tells us that the compound has hydrogens bonded to carbons,but none bonded

to or 
spcarbons. Each of the spectra in Figures13.22and 13.23shows absorption
sp2sp33000 cm13000 cm1.sp32900 cm1sp23100 cm13300 cm1CHsp3sp2CHCHCHOHTutorial:
IR spectraTable 13.5
IR Absorptions of CarbonÐHydrogen Bonds
1450Ð14201385Ð1365CCtrans980
Ð960cis730
Ð675trisubstituted840
Ð800terminal alkene990 and 910
HRRCRCRRCRRHCRHHCRCHHHCHHCRHterminal alkene890 
CarbonÐHydrogen
Stretching Vibrations
wavenumber (cm
1)33003100Ð30202960Ð28502820 and2720CHCH
2CHCHCarbonÐHydrogen
Bending Vibrations
CarbonÐHydrogen
Stretching Vibrations
Wavenumber (cm
1)Wavenumber (cm
1)CarbonÐHydrogen
Bending Vibrations
3CCH
OCCH
CCH
RCH
3BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 508
Section 13.11Absorption Bands
509CHHCsp3CH3HCWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceCH3Figure 13.21
The IR spectrum of methylcyclohexane.2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)CHsp2CHbendsp3CCCH% TransmittanceFigure 13.22
The IR spectrum of cyclohexene.2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceCH3CHCH2CH3Figure 13.23
The IR spectrum of ethylbenzene.bands slightly to the left and slightly to the right of indicating that the com-
pounds that produced those spectra contain hydrogens bonded to and carbons.
Once we know that a compound has hydrogens bonded to carbons,we need to
determine whether those carbons are the carbons of an alkene or of a benzene ring.

A benzene ring is indicated by sharp absorption bands at and  
whereas an alkene is indicated by a band at only (Table13.4).
The compound with the spectrum shown in Figure13.22is,therefore,an alkene,while

that shown in Figure13.23has a benzene ring. Be aware that bending vibrations
NH1600 cm11430 cm1,1500Ð1600 cm1sp2sp2sp3sp23000 cm1,BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 509
510CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyOC% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000CH3CH2CH2CH2CHOaldehyde grouphydrogenBending Vibrations
If a compound has carbons,a look at will tell you whether the
compound has a methyl group. All hydrogens bonded to hybridized carbons show

a bending vibration slightly to the 
leftof Only methyl groups 
show a bending vibration slightly to the 
rightof So if a compound
has a methyl group,absorption bands will appear 
bothto the left and to the right ofotherwise,only the band to the left of will be present. You can
see evidence of a methyl group in Figure13.21(methylcyclohexane) and in

Figure13.23(ethylbenzene),but not in Figure13.22(cyclohexene). Two methyl

groups attached to the same carbon can sometimes be detected by a split in the methyl
peak at (Figure13.25).
1380 cm11400 cm11400 cm1;1400 cm1.CH1400 cm1.CHsp31400 cm1sp32.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000CH3NHWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)CH3CH3CHCH2CH2NH2% TransmittancebendNHstretchFigure 13.25
The IR spectrum of isopentylamine. The double peak at indicates the presence
of an isopropyl group. Two bonds are indicated as well.
NH1380 cm1also occur at so absorption at that wavelength does not always indicate a
bond. However,absorption bands resulting from bends tend to be broad-
er (due to hydrogen bonding) and more intense (due to being more polar) than those re-

sulting from stretches (see Figure13.25),and they will be accompanied by
stretching at (Table13.4).
The stretch of the bond in an aldehyde group shows two absorption
bandsÑone at and the other at (Figure13.24). This makes
aldehydes relatively easy to identify because essentially no other absorption occurs at

these wavenumbers.
2720 cm12820 cm1CH3500Ð3300 cm1NHCCNHCC1600 cm1,Figure 13.24
The IR spectrum of pentanal. The absorptions at and readily identify
an aldehyde group. Note also the intense absorption band at indicating a
bond.CO1730 cm12720 cm12820BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 510
Section 13.13Absence of Absorption Bands
511bending vibrations for hydrogens bonded to carbons give rise to absorp-
tion bands in the region (Table13.5). As the table shows,the frequen-

cy of the bending vibrations of an alkene depends on the number of alkyl groups

attached to the double bond and the configuration of the alkene. It is important to real-

ize that these absorption bands can be shifted out of the characteristic regions if

strongly electron-withdrawing or electron-donating substituents are close to the double

bond (Section13.10). Open-chain compounds with more than four adjacent methylene
groups show a characteristic absorption band at that is due to in-phase
rocking of the methylene groups (Figure13.19).
13.12The Shape of Absorption BandsThe shape of an absorption band can be helpful in identifying the compound responsi-
ble for an IR spectrum. For example,both and bonds stretch at

wavenumbers above but the shapes of their stretches are distinctive. No-

tice the difference in the shape of these absorption bands in the IR spectra of 1-hexanol

(Figure13.19),pentanoic acid (Figure13.20),and isopentylamine (Figure13.25). An
absorption band is narrower and less intense than an 
absorption band and the absorption band of a carboxylic acid
is broader than the absorption band of an alcohol (Sec-
tions13.9and 13.10). Notice that two absorption bands are detectable in Figure13.25

for the stretch because there are two bonds in the compound.
PROBLEM 22a.Why is an stretch more intense than an stretch?
b.Why is the stretch of a carboxylic acid broader than the stretch of an
alcohol?13.13Absence of Absorption BandsThe absence of an absorption band can be as useful as the presence of a band in iden-
tifying a compound by IR spectroscopy. For example,the spectrum in Figure13.26

shows a strong absorption at indicating the presence of a bond.

Clearly,the compound is not an alcohol because there is no absorption above
Nor is it an ester or any other kind of carbonyl compound because there is
no absorption at The compound has no C
N,CN,CC,CC,1700 cm1.3100 cm1.CO1100 cm1,OHOHNHOHNHNHOH3300Ð2500 cm1OH3300 cm1,OH3300 cm1NH3100 cm1,NHOH720 cm1CH2CH1000Ð600 cm1sp2CHThe position, intensity, and shape
of an absorption band are helpful in

identifying functional groups.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceFigure 13.26
The IR spectrum of diethyl ether.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 511
or bonds. We may deduce,then,that the compound is an ether. Its 
absorption bands show that it has only hybridized carbons and that it has a methyl

group. We also know that the compound has fewer than four adjacent methylene

groups,because there is no absorption at The compound is actually

diethyl ether.
PROBLEM 23How does one know that the absorption band at in Figure13.26is due to a
bond and not to a bond?
PROBLEM 24a.An oxygen-containing compound shows an absorption band at and no
absorption bands at or . What class of com-

pound is it?b.A nitrogen-containing compound shows no absorption band at and no
absorption bands between and . What class of compound is it?
PROBLEM 25How could IR spectroscopy distinguish between the following?
a.a ketone and an aldehyded.
cis-2-hexene and 
trans
-2-hexene
b.a cyclic ketone and an open-chain ketonee.cyclohexene and cyclohexane

c.benzene and cyclohexenef.a primary amine and a tertiary amine
PROBLEM 26For each of the following pairs of compounds,give one absorption band that could be used
to distinguish between them:a.and
b.c.d.e.f.13.14Infrared Inactive Vibrations
Not all vibrations give rise to absorption bands. In order for a vibration to absorb IR
radiation,the dipole moment of the molecule must change when the vibration occurs.

For example,the bond in 1-butene has a dipole moment because the molecule

is not symmetrical about this bond. Recall from Section1.3that the dipole moment is

equal to the magnitude of the charge on the atoms multiplied by the distance between
CCandandCH3CH3CH2C    CCH3CH3CH2C    CHandOCH3CH2COHCH
3CH2CH2OHandOOCH3CH2COCH3CH3CH2COHandCH3CH2OCH3CH3CH2CH2CH31600 cm11700 cm13400 cm11100 cm12700 cm1,3300 cm1,1700 cm1CNCO1100 cm1720 cm1.sp3CHCN512CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 512
Section 13.14Infrared Inactive Vibrations
513them. When the bond stretches,the increasing distance between the atoms in-
creases the dipole moment. Because the dipole moment changes when the bond

stretches,an absorption band is observed for the stretching vibration.
2,3-Dimethyl-2-butene,in contrast,is a symmetrical molecule,so its bond has no
dipole moment. When the bond stretches,it still has no dipole moment. Since stretching

is not accompanied by a change in dipole moment,no absorption band is observed. The

vibration is infrared inactive.
2,3-Dimethyl-2-heptene experiences a very small change
in dipole moment when its bond stretches,so only an extremely weak absorption

band (if any) will be detected for the stretching vibration of the bond.
PROBLEM 27Which of the following compounds has a vibration that is infrared inactive:acetone,
1-butyne,2-butyne,ethene?
PROBLEM 28The mass spectrum and infrared spectrum of an unknown compound are shown in

Figures13.27and 13.28,respectively. Identify the compound.
Cl2,H2O,H2,CCCCCC1-butene2,3-dimethyl-2-butene2,3-dimethyl-2-heptene
H3CCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3H3CH3CH3CCHHCH3CH3CHCH2CH3CCCCCCm/z10080604020020406080
84100Relative abundance55Figure 13.27
The mass spectrum for Problem28.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceFigure 13.28
The IR spectrum for Problem28.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 513
514CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceCH2CCH2CH2CH3CH3Figure 13.29
The IR spectrum of Compound1.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceOCHFigure 13.30
The IR spectrum of Compound2.
13.15Identifying Infrared Spectra
We will now look at some IR spectra and see what we can determine about the struc-
ture of the compounds that give rise to the spectra. We might not be able to identify

the compound precisely,but when we find out what it is,its structure should fit with

our observations.
Compound 1.The absorptions in the region in Figure13.29indi-
cate that hydrogens are attached to both carbons and carbons
Now let
Õs see if the carbons belong to an alkene or to a benzene
ring. The absorption at and the absorption at (Table13.5)

suggest that the compound is a terminal alkene with two alkyl substituents at the

2-position. The lack of absorption at indicates that the compound has

fewer than four adjacent methylene groups. We are not surprised to find that the

compound is 2-methyl-1-pentene.720 cm1890 cm11650 cm1sp22950 cm1.sp33075 cm1sp23000 cm1Compound 2.The absorption in the region in Figure13.30indicates
that hydrogens are attached to carbons but not to carbons. The ab-

sorptions at and indicate that the compound has a benzene ring.

The absorptions at and show that the compound is an aldehyde.

The absorption band for the carbonyl group is lower than normal
so the carbonyl group has partial single-bond character. Thus,it must be
attached directly to the benzene ring. The compound is benzaldehyde.
1720 cm1,1700 cm1(CO)2730 cm12810 cm11460 cm11600 cm1sp33050 cm1sp23000 cm1BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 514
Section 13.15Identifying Infrared Spectra
515Compound 3.The absorptions in the region in Figure13.31indicate
that hydrogens are attached to carbons but not to carbons. The

shape of the strong absorption band at is characteristic of an group.

The absorption at indicates that the compound has a triple bond. The

sharp absorption band at indicates that the compound is a terminal alkyne.

The compound is 2-propyn-1-ol.
3300 cm12100 cm1OH3300 cm1sp22950 cm1sp33000 cm12.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceCCH2OHHCFigure 13.31
The IR spectrum of Compound3.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceOCH3CNHCH3Figure 13.32
The IR spectrum of Compound4.
Compound 4.The absorption in the region in Figure13.32indicates
that hydrogens are attached to carbons The relatively strong absorp-

tion band at suggests that the compound has one bond. The pres-

ence of the bond is confirmed by the absorption at The 

absorption at indicates that the compound is an amide. The compound is

N-methylacetamide.1660 cm1CO1560 cm1.NHNH3300 cm12950 cm1.sp33000 cm1Compound 5.The absorptions in the region in Figure13.33indi-
cate that the compound has hydrogens attached to carbons and

to carbons The absorptions at and indi-

cate that the compound contains a benzene ring. The absorption at for

the carbonyl group indicates that the compound is a ketone and that the carbonyl

group is not directly attached to the benzene ring. The absorption at 

indicates that the compound contains a methyl group. The compound is 1-phenyl-

2-butanone.
1380 cm11720 cm11500 cm11605 cm13000 cm1.sp33000 cm1sp23000 cm1BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 515
516CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceOCH2CCH2CH3Figure 13.33
The IR spectrum of Compound5.
SummaryMass spectrometry
allows us to determine the 
molecularmassand the molecular formulaof a compound,as well as
certain structural features. In mass spectrometry,a small

sample of the compound is vaporized and then ionized as a

result of an electronÕs being removed from each molecule,
producing a molecular ionÑa radical cation. Many of the
molecular ions break apart into cations,radicals,neutral

molecules,and other radical cations. The bonds most like-

ly to break are the weakest ones and those that result in the

formation of the most stable products. The mass spectrom-

eter records a 
mass spectrumÑa graph of the relative
abundance of each positively charged fragment,plotted

against its value.
The molecular ion(M) peak is due to the fragment that re-
sults when an electron is knocked out of a molecule; the 
value of a molecular ion gives the molecular mass of the
compound. The Ònitrogen ruleÓstates that if a compound has
an odd-mass molecular ion,the compound contains an odd

number of nitrogen atoms. Peaks with smaller values
Ñfragment ion peaksÑrepresent positively charged frag-
ments of the molecule. The 
base peakis the peak with the
greatest intensity. High-resolution mass spectrometers deter-

mine the exact molecular mass,which allows a compound
Õsmolecular formula to be determined.The peak occurs because there are two naturally
occurring isotopes of carbon. The number of carbon atoms in

a compound can be calculated from the relative intensities of

the M and peaks. A large peak is evidence of

a compound containing either chlorine or bromine; if it is

one-third the height of the M peak,the compound contains
M2M1M12.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittancePROBLEM 29A compound with molecular formula gives the infrared spectrum shown in
Figure13.34. Identify the compound.
C4H6OFigure 13.34
The IR spectrum for Problem29.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 516
Problems517one chlorine atom; if the M and peaks are about the
same height,the compound contains one bromine atom.
Characteristic fragmentation patterns are associated with
specific functional groups. Electron bombardment is most

likely to dislodge a lone-pair electron. A bond between car-

bon and a more electronegative atom breaks 
heterolytically
,with the electrons going to the more electronegative atom. A

bond between carbon and an atom of similar electronegativi-

ty breaks homolytically; occurs because the

species that is formed is a resonance-stabilized cation.Spectroscopy
is the study of the interaction of matter andelectromagnetic radiation
. A continuum of different types
of electromagnetic radiation constitutes the electromagnetic

spectrum. High-energy radiation is associated with 
high fre-
quencies,large wavenumbers
,and 
short wavelengths.Infrared spectroscopy
identifies the kinds of functional
groups in a compound. Bonds vibrate with stretching and
bending motions. Each stretching and bending vibration
occurs with a characteristic frequency. It takes more energy

to stretch a bond than to bend it. When a compound is bom-
A cleavageM2barded with radiation of a frequency that exactly matches the
frequency of one of its vibrations,the molecule absorbs ener-

gy and exhibits an 
absorption band
. The functional group
region
of an IR spectrum is where most
of the functional groups show absorption bands; the

fingerprint region
is characteristic of thecompound as a whole.The position,intensity,and shape of an absorption band
help identify functional groups. The amount of energy re-

quired to stretch a bond depends on the 
strength
of the bond:
Stronger bonds show absortion bands at larger wavenum-

bers. Therefore,the frequency of the absorption depends on

bond order,hybridization,electronic,and resonance effects.

The frequency is inversely related to the 
massof the atoms,so heavier atoms vibrate at lower frequencies. The intensity

of an absorption band depends on the size of the change in
dipole moment associated with the vibration and on the
number of bonds responsible for the absorption. In order for
a vibration to absorb IR radiation,the dipole moment of the

molecule must change when the vibration occurs.1400Ð600 cm14000Ð1400 cm1Key Terms
absorption band (p.500)
base peak (p.486)

bending vibration (p.499)
cleavage (p.490)
electromagnetic radiation (p.497)

fingerprint region (p.501)

fragment ion peak (p.485)

frequency (p.497)
afunctional group region (p.501)
Hooke
Õs law (p.503)
infrared radiation (p.500)

infrared spectroscopy (p.483)

infrared spectrum (p.500)

mass spectrometry (p.483)

mass spectrum (p.485)

McLafferty rearrangement (p.494)
molecular ion (p.484)
nominal molecular mass (p.485)

radical cation (p.484)

spectroscopy (p.497)

stretching frequency (p.502)

stretching vibration (p.499)

wavelength (p.497)

wavenumber (p.498)
Problems
30.Which peak would be more intense in the mass spectrum of the following compounds
Ñthe peak at or the peak at
a.3-methylpentaneb.2-methylpentane
31.List three factors that influence the intensity of an IR absorption band.

32.For each of the following pairs of compounds,identify one IR absorption band that could be used to distinguish between them:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.and
CH3CH2CCCH3CH3CH2CHCHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH2CHCH
2andCH3CCH3CH3CCH2OCH3CH3COCH2CH3andOOCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3andCH3CH2CH2OHCHCH
3OHandOOCH3CH2COCH3CH3CH2CCH3and71?57BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 517
518CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopyg.j.and
h.k.
i.cis-2-buteneand
trans
-2-butenel.
33.a.How could you determine by IR spectroscopy that the following reaction had occurred?
b.After purifying the product,how could you determine that all the had been removed?
34.What identifying characteristics would be present in the mass spectrum of a compound containing two bromine atoms?

35.Assuming that the force constant is approximately the same for and bonds,predict the relative positions of
their stretching vibrations.36.A mass spectrum shows significant peaks at 115,140,and 143. Which of the following compounds is responsible for
that mass spectrum:4,7-dimethyl-1-octanol,2,6-dimethyl-4-octanol,or 2,2,4-trimethyl-4-heptanol?
37.How could IR spectroscopy distinguish between 1,5-hexadiene and 2,4-hexadiene?

38.A compound gives a mass spectrum with peaks at (40%),112 (100%),114 (33%),and essentially no other peaks.
Identify the compound.39.What hydrocarbons will have a molecular ion peak at 

40.In the following boxes,list the types of bonds and the approximate wavenumber at which each type of bond is expected to show
 anIR absorption:41.For each of the IR spectra in Figures13.35,13.36,and 13.37,four compounds are shown. In each case,indicate which of the four
compounds is responsible for the spectrum.a.OCH3CH2CH2CCCH
3CH3CH2CH2COHCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CH2CCH
Wavenumber (cm1)36003000180014001000
112?7787,COCN,CC,NH2NH2CH3OCHNH2NH2HOÐ, HandCH
OCOOOCH3CH2CNH2CH3CH2COCH3andOOandCH3CH2OCH3CH3CH2CH2OHOOCH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CCH3andBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 518
Problems519Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceFigure 13.36
The IR spectrum for Problem41b.
% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Figure 13.37
The IR spectrum for Problem41c.
Figure 13.35
The IR spectrum for Problem41a.
b.CH3CH2COHCH
3CH2COCH2CH3CH3CH2CHOOOOCH3CH2CCH3c.C(CH3)3CH2CH2BrCHCH
2CH2OHBRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 519
520CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy42.What peaks in their mass spectra would be used to distinguish between 4-methyl-2-pentanone and 2-methyl-3-pentanone?
43.A compound is known to be one of those shown here. What absorption bands in the compound
Õs IR spectrum would allow you to
identify the compound.44.How could IR spectroscopy distinguish among 1-hexyne,2-hexyne,and 3-hexyne?
45.For each of the IR spectra in Figures13.38,13.39,and13.40,indicate which of the five given compounds is responsible for the
spectrum.a.CH3CH2CHCH3CH2CH2COHCHCH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH2CH2O  CH3CH2CH2OCH3OHAHOCCH3CH3OBWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000% Transmittance% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Figure 13.39
The IR spectrum for Problem45b.
b.OCOHOCHOCCH3CH2OHOHFigure 13.38
The IR spectrum for Problem45a.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 520
Problems521Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceFigure 13.40
The IR spectrum for Problem45c.
46.Each of the IR spectra shown in Figure13.41is the spectrum of one of the following compounds. Identify the compound that is
responsible for each spectrum.OOOOOCH3CH2CHCHCH2CHCNH2CH3CH3CH2CNH2c.OOCCH3OCH2OHCH2CH3CCH
OCH3Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% Transmittancea.Figure 13.41
The IR spectra for Problem46.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 521
522CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared Spectroscopy47.Predict the major characteristic IR absorption bands that would be given by each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
48.Given that the force constants are similar for and bonds,explain why the stretching vibration of a bond
occurs at a greater wavenumber.
49.The IR spectrum of a compound with molecular formula was obtained in and is shown in Figure13.42. Identify the
compound.50.The IR spectrum shown in Figure13.43is the spectrum of one of the following compounds. Identify the compound.
CH2OHCOOHNH2OHCH2NH2CCl4C5H8OCHCCCHCH2COHOOCH3CH2CCH2CH2NH2CH2CCH
OCOCH2CH3CH2CH2OHOCHCH2CHCH22.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000b.c.Figure 13.41 (continued)
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 522
Problems523Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceFigure 13.43
The IR spectrum for Problem50.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.5220020001800160014001200100080060
0240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceFigure 13.44
The IR spectrum for Problem51.
51.The IR spectrum shown in Figure13.44is the spectrum of one of the following compounds. Identify the compound.
CCH2OHCH2OHOCH2OHCOHOHOFigure 13.42
The IR spectrum for Problem49.
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 523
524CHAPTER 13M
ass Spectrometry and Infrared SpectroscopyWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000% TransmittanceFigure 13.46
The IR and mass spectra for Problem54b.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000020406080100120
m/z4371851005829100500Relative abundanceWavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittanceFigure 13.45
The IR and mass spectra for Problem54a.
52.Determine the molecular formula of a saturated acyclic hydrocarbon with an M peak at with a relative intensity of
27.32%,and an peak with a relative intensity of 2.10%.
53.Calculate the approximate wavenumber at which a stretch will occur,given that the force constant for the bond is
54.The IR and mass spectra for three different compounds are shown in Figures13.45
Ð13.47.Identifyeach compound.
10105 gs2.CCCCM1100BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 524
Problems525Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)m/zRelative abundance1005002.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000020406080100
447257% Transmittancem/z020406080100120140160
Relative abundance835541100500Figure 13.47
The IR and mass spectra for Problem54c.
Figure 13.46 (continued)
BRUI13-481_525r3  27-03-2003  12:11 PM  Page 525
Determiningthe struc-
tures of compounds

is an important partof organic chemistry. After a

compound has been synthe-

sized,its structure must be confirmed. Chemists who study natural products must deter-

mine the structure of a naturally occurring compound before they can design a synthesis

to produce the compound in greater quantities than nature can provide or before they can

design and synthesize related compounds with modified properties.
Chapter13introduced two instrumental techniques used to determine the structure
of organic compounds:mass spectrometry and IR spectroscopy. Now we will look at

nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
,another instrumental technique that
chemists use to determine a compoundÕs structure. 
NMR spectroscopy
helps toidentify the carbonÐhydrogen framework of an organic compound.
The power of NMR spectroscopy,compared with that of the other instrumental
techniques we have studied,is that it not only makes it possible to identify the func-

tionality at a specific carbon but also lets us determine what the neighboring carbons

look like. In many cases,NMR spectroscopy can be used to determine the entire struc-

ture of a molecule.14.1Introduction to NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy was developed by physical chemists in the late 1940s to study
the properties of atomic nuclei. In 1951,chemists realized that NMR spectroscopy

could also be used to determine the structures of organic compounds. We have seen

that electrons are charged,spinning particles with two allowed spin states:and
(Section1.2). Certain nuclei also have allowed spin states of and 
and this property allows them to be studied by NMR. Examples of such nuclei are
and Because hydrogen nuclei (protons) were the first nuclei studied by nuclear mag-
netic resonance,the acronym ÒNMRÓis generally assumed to mean (
proton
 1H NMR 31P. 1H, 13C, 15N, 19F,12,12121252614NMR Spectroscopy4876
9103210
51-NitropropaneBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:09 PM  Page 526
Section 14.1Introduction to NMR Spectroscopy
527no appliedmagnetic fieldEnergy-spin state-spin statemagneticfield is
appliedFigure 14.1
In the absence of an appliedmagnetic field, the spins of the
nuclei are randomly oriented. In the
presence of an applied magnetic
field, the spins of the nuclei line up
with or against the field.magnetic resonance
). Spectrometers were later developed for 
and other magnetic nuclei.Spinning charged nuclei generate a magnetic field,like the field of a small bar
magnet. In the absence of an applied magnetic field,the nuclear spins are randomly

oriented. However,when a sample is placed in an applied magnetic field (Fig-

ure14.1),the nuclei twist and turn to align themselves 
withor against
the field of
the larger magnet. More energy is needed for a proton to align against the field than

with it. Protons that align with the field are in the lower-energy pro-

tons that align against the field are in the higher-energy More nuclei

are in the state than in the state. The difference in the populations is

very small (about 20 out of a million protons),but is sufficient to form the basis of

NMR spectroscopy.
b-spina-spinB-spin state.A-spin state;19F NMR, 31P NMR,13C NMR, 15N NMR,EnergyApplied magnetic field (B0)14.0927.046
-spin state -spin state 300 MHz600 MHzFigure 14.2
The greater the strength of the applied magnetic field, the greater is the difference in
energy between the and states.
b-spin
a-Edward Mills Purcell (1912Ð1997)
and Felix Bloch
did the work on themagnetic properties of nuclei that

made the development of NMR

spectroscopy possible. They shared

the 1952 Nobel Prize in physics.
Purcell was born in Illinois. 

He received a Ph.D. from Harvard

University in 1938 and immediately

was hired as a faculty member in the

physics department.Felix Bloch (1905Ð1983)
was bornin Switzerland. His first academic

appointment was at the University of

Leipzig. After leaving Germany upon

HitlerÕs rise to power,Bloch worked

at universities in Denmark,Holland,

and Italy. He eventually came to the

United States,becoming a citizen in

1939. He was a professor of physics

at Stanford University and worked on

the atomic bomb project at 

Los Alamos,New Mexico,during

World War II.
The energy difference between the and states depends on the
strength of the applied magnetic field
The greater the strength of the magneticfield to which we expose the nucleus,the greater is the difference in energy between

the and states (Figure14.2).
When the sample is subjected to a pulse of radiation whose energy corresponds to
the difference in energy between the and states,nuclei in the 

state are promoted to the state. This transition is called 
ÒflippingÓthe spin.Because the energy difference between the and states is so small
Ñforcurrently available magnets
Ñonly a small amount of energy is needed to flip the spin.
The radiation required is in the radiofrequency (rf) region of the electromagnetic

spectrum and is called 
rf radiation. When the nuclei undergo relaxation (i.e.,return to
their original state),they emit electromagnetic signals whose frequency depends on
b-spina-b-spina-spinb-spina-b-spina-0.b-spina-BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:09 PM  Page 527
528CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyEarthÕs magnetic field is 
measured at the equator. Its maximum

surface magnetic field is 
measured at the south magnetic pole.
7105 T,5105 T,The magnetic field is proportional to the
operating frequency.
1Until recently,the gauss (G) was the unit in which magnetic field strength was commonly measured
1 T104 G.the difference in energy between the and states. The NMR
spectrometer detects these signals and displays them as a plot of signal frequency

versus intensity
Ñan NMR spectrum. It is because the nuclei are in resonance
with therf radiation that the term Ònuclear magnetic resonance
Ócame into being. In this con-
text,
ÒresonanceÓrefers to the flipping back and forth of nuclei between the and
states in response to the rf radiation.Recall that PlanckÕs constant,h,is the proportionality constant relating the
difference in energy to the frequency (Section13.6) The following

equation shows that the energy difference between the spin states depends on

the operating frequency of the spectrometer,which in turn depends on the strength

of the magnetic field measured in tesla (T)
1,and the 
gyromagnetic ratio
The gyromagnetic ratio
(also called the magnetogyric ratio) is a constant that
depends on the magnetic moment ofthe particular kind of nucleus. In the case of

the proton,the value of is in the case of a nucleus,it is
Canceling PlanckÕs constant on both sides of the equation gives 
The following calculation shows that if an NMR spectrometer is equipped with
a magnet with a magnetic field the spectrometer will require an

operating frequency of 300MHz (megahertz):
The equation shows that the 
magnetic fieldis proportional to the operating
frequency
(MHz). Therefore,if the spectrometer has a more powerful magnet,it must
have a higher operating frequency. For example,a magnetic field of 14.092T requires

an operating frequency of 600MHz.
Today
Õs NMR spectrometers operate at frequencies between 60 and 900MHz. The
operating frequency
of a particular spectrometer depends on the strength of the built-
in magnet. The greater the operating frequency of the instrument
Ñand the strongerthe magnetÑthe better is the resolution (separation of the signals) of the NMR spec-
trum (Section14.17).
Because each kind of nucleus has its own gyromagnetic ratio,different energies are
required to bring different kinds of nuclei into resonance. For example,an NMR

spectrometer with a magnet requiring a frequency of 300MHz to flip the spin of an 

nucleus requires a frequency of 75MHz to flip the spin of a nucleus. NMR spec-

trometers are equipped with radiation sources that can be tuned to different frequen-

cies so that they can be used to obtain NMR spectra of different kinds of nuclei

(etc.).
PROBLEM 1What frequency (in MHz) is required to cause a proton to flip its spin when it is exposed to
a magnetic field of 1 tesla?
 1H, 13C, 15N, 19F, 31P, 13C 1H0 300106 Hz300 MHz 2.67510823.1416 T1 s17.046 T ng2p 007.046 T, 1H ng2p 0.n g2p 06.688107 T1 s1. 13C2.675108 T1 s1;gg.0,nb-spina-b-spina-BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 528
Section 14.2Fourier Transform NMR
529PROBLEM 2a.Calculate the magnetic field (in tesla) required to flip an nucleus in an NMR
spectrometer that operates at 360MHz.
b.What strength magnetic field is required when a 500-MHz instrument is used?
14.2Fourier Transform NMR
To obtain an NMR spectrum,one dissolves a small amount of a compound in about
0.5mL of solvent and puts the solution into a long,thin glass tube,which is placed

within a powerful magnetic field (Figure14.3). The solvents used in NMR are

discussed in Section14.16. Spinning the sample tube about its long axis averages the

position of the molecules in the magnetic field and thus greatly increases the resolu-

tion of the spectrum.In modern instruments called pulsed Fourier transform (FT) spectrometers
,the
magnetic field is kept constant and an rf pulse of short duration excites all the pro-

tons simultaneously. Because the short rf pulse covers a range of frequencies,the
 1Hradiofrequency generatordetector andamplifiersample in tubesuperconductingmagnetNMR spectrumNIKOLA TESLA(1856Ð1943)Nikola Tesla was born in
Croatia,the son of a clergyman. He emi-

grated to the United States in 1884 and

became a citizen in 1891. He was a

proponent of alternating current and

bitterly fought Edison,who promoted

direct current. Although Tesla did not win

his dispute with Marconi over which of

them invented the radio,Tesla is given

credit for developing neon and fluorescent

lighting,the electron microscope,the

refrigerator motor,and the Tesla coil,a

type of transformer.
Nikola Tesla in his laboratory
Figure 14.3
Schematic of an NMR spectrometer.
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 529
530CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyThe 1991 Nobel Prize in chemistry
was awarded to 
Richard R. Ernst
for two important contributions:

FTÐNMR spectroscopy and an NMR

tomography method that forms the

basis of magnetic resonance imaging

(MRI). Ernst was born in 1933,
received a Ph.D. from the Swiss

Federal Institute of Technology

[Eidgenıssische Technische

Hochschule (ETH)] in Zurich,and

became a research scientist at Varian

Associates in Palo Alto,California.

In 1968,he returned to the ETH,

where he is a professor of chemistry.
The larger the magnetic field sensed bythe proton, the higher is the frequency

of the signal.2The terms 
ÒprotonÓand ÒhydrogenÓare both used to describe covalently bonded hydrogen in
discussions of NMR spectroscopy.
individual protons absorb the frequency required to come into resonance (flip their
spin). As the protons relax (i.e.,as they return to equilibrium),they produce a complex

signalÑcalled a free induction decay (FID)Ñat a frequency corresponding to 
The intensity of the signal decays as the nuclei lose the energy they gained from the rf

pulse. A computer collects and then converts the intensity-versus-time data into inten-

sity-versus-frequency information in a mathematical operation known as a 
Fourier
transform
,producing a spectrum called a 
Fourier transform NMR (FTÐNMR)
spectrum. An FT
ÐNMR spectrum can be recorded in about 2 seconds
Ñand many
FIDs can be averaged in a few minutes
Ñusing less than 5mg of compound. The NMR
spectra in this book are FT
ÐNMR spectra that were taken on a spectrometer with an
operating frequency of 300MHz. This book discusses the theory behind FT
ÐNMR,rather than that behind the older continuous wave (CW) NMR,because FT
ÐNMR ismore modern and is easier to understand.14.3ShieldingWe have seen that when a sample in a magnetic field is irradiated with rf radiation of
the proper frequency,each proton
2in an organic compound gives a signal at a fre-
quency that depends on the energy difference between the and states,

where is determined by the strength of the magnetic field (Figure14.2). If all the

protons in an organic compound were in exactly the same environment,they would all

give signals with the same frequency in response to a given applied magnetic field. If

this were the case,all NMR spectra would consist of one signal,which would tell us

nothing about the structure of the compound,except that it contains protons.
A nucleus,however,is embedded in a cloud of electrons that partly 
shieldsit fromthe applied magnetic field. Fortunately for chemists,the shielding varies for different

protons within a molecule. In other words,all the protons do not experience the same

applied magnetic field.
What causes shielding? In a magnetic field,the electrons circulate about the nuclei
and induce a local magnetic field that opposes (i.e.,that subtracts from) the applied

magnetic field. The 
effective magnetic field
,therefore,is what the nuclei 
ÒsenseÓthrough the surrounding electronic environment:
This means that the greater the electron density of the environment in which the pro-
ton is located,the greater is and the more the proton is shielded from the applied

magnetic field. This type of shielding is called 
diamagnetic shielding. Thus,protons
in electron-dense environments sense a 
smaller effective magnetic field
. They,there-
fore,will require a 
lower frequency
to come into resonanceÑthat is,flip their spin
Ñbecause is smaller (Figure14.2). Protons in electron-poor environments sense a

larger effective magnetic field
and,therefore,will require a 
higher frequency
to come
into resonance,because is larger.
We see a signal in an NMR spectrum for each proton in a different environment.
Protons in electron-rich environments are more shielded and appear at lower frequen-

ciesÑon the right-hand side of the spectrum (Figure14.4). Protons in electron-poor
environments are less shielded and appear at higher frequencies
Ñon the left-hand sideof the spectrum. (Notice that high frequency in an NMR spectrum is on the left-hand

side,just as it is in IR and UV/Vis spectra.)
The terms 
Òupfield
Óand Òdownfield,
Ówhich came into use when continuous
wave (CW) spectrometers were used (before the advent of Fourier transform

spectrometers),are so entrenched in the vocabulary of NMR that you should know
localBeffectiveBappliedBlocalb-spina-.BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 530
Section 14.4The Number of Signals in the NMR Spectrum
5311HFrequencyIntensity"downfield""upfield"
deshielded nucleishielded nuclei
these protons sense alarger effective magnetic
field, so come into resonance
at a higher frequencythese protons sense asmaller effective magnetic
field, so come into resonance
at a lower frequencyFigure 14.4
Shielded nuclei come intoresonance at lower frequencies
than deshielded nuclei.what they mean. 
Upfield
means farther to the right-hand side of the spectrum,and
downfield
means farther to the left-hand side of the spectrum. In contrast to
FTÐNMR techniques,which hold magnetic field strength constant and vary frequen-
cy,continuous-wave techniques hold frequency constant and vary magnetic field.

The magnetic field increases from left to right across a spectrum because higher

magnetic fields are required for shielded protons to come into resonance at a given

frequency (Figure14.4). Therefore,
upfield
is toward the right and 
downfield
istoward the left.
14.4The Number of Signals in the NMR Spectrum
Protons in the same environment are called 
chemically equivalent protons
. For
example,1-bromopropane has three different sets of chemically equivalent protons.

The three methyl protons are chemically equivalent because of rotation about the
bond. The two methylene protons on the middle carbon are chemically equiva-
lent,and the two methylene protons on the carbon bonded to the bromine atom make

up the third set of chemically equivalent protons.
Each set of chemically equivalent protons in a compound gives rise to a signal in
the NMR spectrum of that compound. (Sometimes the signals are not sufficiently

separated and overlap each other. When this happens,one sees fewer signals than

anticipated.) Because 1-bromopropane has three sets of chemically equivalent pro-

tons,it has three signals in its NMR spectrum.
2-Bromopropane has two sets of chemically equivalent protons and,therefore,it
has two signals in its NMR spectrum. The six methyl protons in 2-bromo-

propane are equivalent,so they give rise to only one signal. Ethyl methyl ether has

three sets of chemically equivalent protons:the methyl protons on the carbon

adjacent to the oxygen,the methylene protons on the carbon adjacent to the oxygen,
 1H 1H 1HCH3CH2CH2Brchemically equivalent
protonschemically
equivalent
protonschemically
equivalent
protonsCC1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 531
and the methyl protons on the carbon that is one carbon removed from the oxygen.
The chemically equivalent protons in the following compounds are designated by

the same letter:You can tell how many sets of chemically equivalent protons a compound has from the
number of signals in its NMR spectrum.
Sometimes,two protons on the same carbon are not equivalent. For example,the
NMR spectrum of chlorocyclobutane has five signals. Even though they are bond-
ed to the same carbon,the and protons are not equivalent because they are not

in the same environment:is trans to Cl and is cis to Cl. Similarly,the and 

protons are not equivalent.
PROBLEM 3How many signals would you expect to see in the NMR spectrum of each of the
following compounds?
a.f.k.
b.g.l.
c.h.m.
d.i.n.
e.j.o.
PROBLEM 4How could you distinguish the NMR spectra of the following compounds?
a.b.c.
CH3OCH2CCH2OCH3CH3CH3CH3OCH3CH3OCH2OCH3 1HCCClHCH3HOCH3CH3CCClHClHCH3CHBrCHCHCH2ONO2CH3CHCH2CHCH3CH3CH3CH2CHClBrBrCH3CH2CHCH2CH3ClBrCH2CH2BrCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CCH3OCH3CH2CH2CH3 1HHHHHHH 1H 1H532CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy3-D Molecule:ChlorocyclobutaneCCCCababacbaaaaaabacacabH3CH3CHHHHHBrHHHHHHNO2HHHHHCH3OCHCl2two signalsthree signals
one signalthree signals
two signalschlorocyclobutaneHa and Hb are not equivalentHc and Hd are not equivalent dHdHcHcHHHbaHeClits 1H NMR spectrumhas five signalsthree signalsabc
CH3CH2CH2Brtwo signalsaba
CH3CHCH3one signalaaCH3OCH3Brtwo signalsaaabCH3COCH3CH3CH3acb
CH3CH2OCH3three signalsBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 532
Section 14.5The Chemical Shift
5333-D Molecule:Tetramethylsilane
PROBLEM 5There are three isomeric dichlorocyclopropanes. Their NMR spectra show one signal
for isomer 1,two signals for isomer 2,and three signals for isomer 3. Draw the structures

of isomers 1,2,and 3.
14.5The Chemical ShiftA small amount of an inert reference compound
is added to the sample tube contain-ing the compound whose NMR spectrum is to be taken. The positions of the signals in

an NMR spectrum are defined according to how far they are from the signal of the ref-

erence compound. The most commonly used reference compound is tetramethylsilane

(TMS). Because TMS is a highly volatile compound,it can easily be removed from the

sample by evaporation after the NMR spectrum is taken.
The methyl protons of TMS are in a more electron-dense environment than are
most protons in organic molecules,because silicon is less electronegative than carbon

(electronegativities of 1.8 and 2.5,respectively). Consequently,the signal for the

methyl protons of TMS is at a lower frequency than most other signals (i.e.,it appears

to the right of the other signals).The position at which a signal occurs in an NMR spectrum is called the
chemical shift.
The chemical shiftis a measure of how far the signal is from the
reference TMS signal. The most common scale for chemical shifts is the (delta)

scale. The TMS signal is used to define the zero position on this scale. The chem-

ical shift is determined by measuring the distance from the TMS peak (in hertz)

and dividing by the operating frequency of the instrument (in megahertz). Because

the units are Hz/MHz,a chemical shift has units of parts per million (ppm) of the

operating frequency:
Most proton chemical shifts fall in the range from 0 to 10ppm.
The NMR spectrum for 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane in Figure14.5shows
that the chemical shift of the methyl protons is at 1.05ppm and the chemical shift of
 1Hdchemical shift (ppm)distance downfield from TMS (Hz)operating frequency of the spectrometer (MHz)d 1HtetramethylsilaneTMSCH3SiCH
3CH3CH387653210
CH3CH3CH3CCH2Brmethylene
protonsTMSsignalmethylprotons4 (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.5
NMR spectrum of 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane. The TMS signal is a reference signalfrom which chemical shifts are measured; it defines the zero position on the scale. 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 533
534CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopythe methylene protons is at 3.28ppm. 
Notice that low-frequency (upfield,shielded)
signals have small(ppm) values,whereas high-frequency (downfield,deshielded)

signals have largevalues.
The advantage of the scale is that the chemical shift of a given nucleus is
independent of the operating frequency of the NMR spectrometer
. Thus,the chemical
shift of the methyl protons of 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane is at 1.05ppm in both a

60-MHz and a 360-MHz instrument. In contrast,if the chemical shift were reported in

hertz,it would be at 63Hz in a 60-MHz instrument and at 378 Hz in a 360-MHz

instrument The following diagram will help you

keep track of the terms associated with NMR spectroscopy:
PROBLEM 6A signal has been reported to occur at 600Hz downfield from TMS in an NMR spectrometer
with a 300-MHz operating frequency.
a.What is the chemical shift of the signal?
b.What would its chemical shift be in an instrument operating at 100MHz?

c.How many hertz downfield from TMS would the signal be in a 100-MHz spectrometer?
PROBLEM 7a.If two signals differ by 1.5ppm in a 300-MHz spectrometer,by how much do they
differ in a 100-MHz spectrometer?
b.If two signals differ by 90 hertz in a 300-MHz spectrometer,by how much do they
differ in a 100-MHz spectrometer?
PROBLEM 8Where would you expect to find the NMR signal of relative to the TMS

signal? (Hint:See Table 12.3 on p. 467.)
14.6The Relative Positions of NMR Signals
The NMR spectrum of 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane in Figure14.5has two sig-
nals because the compound has two different kinds of protons. The methylene protons

are in a less electron-dense environment than the methyl protons are because the meth-

ylene protons are closer to the electron-withdrawing bromine. Because the methylene

protons are in a less electron-dense environment,they are less shielded from the ap-

plied magnetic field. The signal for these protons therefore occurs at a higher frequen-

cy than the signal for the more shielded methyl protons. 
Remember that the right-handside of an NMR spectrum is the low-frequency side,where protons in electron-dense

environments (more shielded) show a signal. The left-hand side is the high-frequency

side,where less shielded protons show a signal
(Figure14.4).
We would expect the NMR spectrum of 1-nitropropane to have three signals
because the compound has three different kinds of protons. The closer the protons are
 1H 1H 1H(CH3)2Mg 1Hprotons in electron-poor environmentsprotons in electron-dense environments
deshielded protonsshielded protonsdownfieldupfieldhigh frequencylow frequencylarge  valuessmall 
 valuesfrequency63601.05; 3783601.05.dddThe greater the chemical shift 
the higher the frequency.
(D),The chemical shift is independent 
of the operating frequency of the

spectrometer.
(D)BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 534
 (ppm)487653210
frequencySection 14.6The Relative Positions of NMR Signals
535 1Hto the electron-withdrawing nitro group,the less they are shielded from the applied
magnetic field,so the higher the frequency (i.e.,the farther downfield) at which their

signals will appear. Thus,the protons closest to the nitro group show a signal at the

highest frequency (4.37ppm),and the ones farthest from the nitro group show a signal

at the lowest frequency (1.04ppm).
Compare the chemical shifts of the methylene protons immediately adjacent to thehalogen in each of the following alkyl halides. The position of the signal depends on

the electronegativity of the halogen
Ñthe more electronegative the halogen,the higher
is the frequency of the signal. Thus,the signal for the methylene protons adjacent to

fluorine (the most electronegative of the halogens) occurs at the highest frequency,

whereas the signal for the methylene protons adjacent to iodine (the least electronega-

tive of the halogens) occurs at the lowest frequency.
PROBLEM 9a.Which set of protons in each of the following compounds is the least shielded?
1.b.Which set of protons in each compound is the most shielded?
PROBLEM 10One of the spectra in Figure14.6is due to 1-chloropropane,and the other to 1-iodopropane.
Which is which?BrBr
CH3CH2COCH3CH3CHCHBrO2.3.
CH3CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2NO21.04 ppm2.07 ppm
4.37 ppmElectron withdrawal causes NMR 
signals to appear at higher frequencies

(at larger values).
DCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2F4.50 ppmCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2Cl3.50 ppmCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2Br3.40 ppmCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2I3.20 ppmFigure 14.6
NMR spectra for Problem 10. 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 535
536CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy (ppm)87653210
4frequencyFigure 14.6 (continued)
NMR spectra for Problem 10. 1H14.7Characteristic Values of Chemical Shifts
Approximate values of chemical shifts for different kinds of protons are shown in
Table14.1. (A more extensive compilation of chemical shifts is given in Appen-

dixVI.) An NMR spectrum can be divided into six regions. Rather than memoriz-

ing chemical shift values,if you remember the kinds of protons that are in each region,

you will be able to tell what kinds of protons a molecule has from a quick look at its

NMR spectrum.Table14.1shows that the chemical shift of methyl protons is at a lower frequency
(0.9ppm) than is the chemical shift of methylene protons (1.3ppm) in a similar envi-

ronment and that the chemical shift of methylene protons is at a lower frequency than

is the chemical shift of a methine proton (1.4ppm) in a similar environment. (When

an carbon is bonded to only one hydrogen,the hydrogen is called a 
methinehydrogen
.) For example,the NMR spectrum of butanone shows three signals.
The signal for the aprotons of butanone is the signal at the lowest frequency because
the protons are farthest from the electron-withdrawing carbonyl group. (In correlat-

ing an NMR spectrum with a structure,the set of protons responsible for the signal at

the lowest frequency will be labeled 
a,the next set will be labeled 
b,the next set 
c,etc.) The 
band cprotons are the same distance from the carbonyl group,but the signal
 1Hsp3 1HCCHCHOCCOCCHCHC9.0128.06.54.52.51.50
HZCOH
OHvinylicZ 
 O, N, halogenCCHsaturatedallylic (ppm)BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 536
Section 14.7Characteristic Values of Chemical Shifts
537In a similar environment, the signal 
for methyl protons occurs at a lower

frequency than the signal for methylene

protons, which in turn occurs at a lower

frequency than the signal for a methine

proton.
for the 
bprotons is at a lower frequency because methyl protons appear at a lower
frequency than do methylene protons in a similar environment.
The signal for the aprotons of 2-methoxypropane is the signal at the lowest
frequency in the NMR spectrum of this compound because these protons are far-

thest from the electron-withdrawing oxygen. The 
band cprotons are the same dis-tance from the oxygen,but the signal for the 
bprotons appears at a lower frequency
because,in a similar environment,methyl protons appear at a lower frequency than

does a methine proton. 1Hbutanone2-methoxypropanebca
aacb
CH3CH2CCH3OCH3OCHCH3CH3Tutorial:
NMR chemical shiftsTable 14.1
Approximate
chemical shift
(ppm)Approximate
chemical shift
(ppm)Type of proton
Type of proton
Approximate Values of Chemical Shifts for 
1H NMRa(CH3)4Si0
CH30.9CH2CHCCCH
31.31.41.7COOCH3CH32.1COOHCONH2Variable, 10Ð12Variable, 5Ð8CCH
2.4ROCH
33.3RRCCH
2RNH24.7RRRCHC5.32.3H6.5Ð8HC9.0Ð10HCI2.5Ð4HCBr2.5Ð4HCCl3Ð4HCF4Ð4.5Variable, 1.5Ð4ROHVariable, 2Ð5ArOHVariable, 4Ð7aThe values are approximate because they are affected by neighboring substituents.
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 537
PROBLEM 11In each of the following compounds,which of the underlined protons has the greater
chemical shift (i.e.,the farther downfield signal or the higher frequency signal)?
a.c.e.
b.d.
PROBLEM 12In each of the following pairs of compounds,which of the underlined protons has the
greater chemical shift (i.e.,the farther downfield signal or the higher frequency signal)?
a.c.
b.PROBLEM 13Without referring to Table14.1,label the protons in the following compounds. The proton
that gives the signal at the lowest frequency should be labeled 
a,the next 
b,etc.
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.i.
14.8Integration of NMR SignalsThe two signals in the NMR spectrum of 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane in
Figure14.5are not the same size because 
the area under each signal is proportional to
the number of protons that gives rise to the signal
. (The spectrum is shown again in
Figure14.7.) The area under the signal occurring at the lower frequency is larger be-

cause the signal is caused by ninemethyl protons,while the smaller,higher-frequency
signal results from twomethylene protons.You probably remember from a calculus course that the area under a curve can be
determined by integration. An NMR spectrometer is equipped with a computer

that calculates the integrals electronically. Modern spectrometers print out the

integrals as numbers on the spectrum. The integrals can also be displayed by a line of

integration superimposed on the original spectrum (Figure14.7). The height of each

integration step is proportional to the area under that signal,which,in turn,is propor-

tional to the number of protons giving rise to the signal. By measuring the heights of
 1H 1HCH3CHCHCH3ClCH3CH3CH2CH2OCHCH3CH3ClCH2CH2CH2ClCH3CHCH2OCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CHCH3OCH3CH3CH2CH2CCH3OCH3CH2CH2COCH3OCH3CH2CHOCH3CH2CH2ClorCH
3CH2CHCH3ClOOCH3CH2CHorCH
3CH2COCH3CH3CH2CH2ClorCH
3CH2CH2BrOCH3CH3CHCCH2CH3CH3CH3CHOCH3CH2CH3CH2CHCH3CH2CHCH3ClBrBr
CH3CHCHBr538CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 538
Section 14.8Integration of NMR Signals
53987653210
CH3CH3CH3CCH2Br4 (ppm)1.67.0frequencyintegrationlineFigure 14.7
Analysis of the integration line in the NMR spectrum of 1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane.
 1Hthe integration steps,you can determine that the ratio of the integrals is approximately
(The measured integrals are approximate by as much as 10%
because of experimental error.) The ratios are multiplied by a number that will cause

all the numbers to be close to whole numbers
Ñin this case,we multiply by 2
Ñasthere can be only whole numbers of protons. That means that the ratio of protons in the

compound is which is rounded to 
The integrationtells us the relative
number of protons that give rise to each signal,
not the 
absolutenumber. For example,integration could not distinguish between
1,1-dichloroethane and 1,2-dichloro-2-methylpropane because both compounds
would show an integral ratio of 
PROBLEM 14How would integration distinguish the NMR spectra of the following compounds?
PROBLEM 15SOLVED
a.Calculate the ratios of the different kinds of protons in a compound with an integral
ratio of (going from left to right across the spectrum).
b.Determine the structure of a compound that would give these relative integrals in the
observed order.
SOLUTIONa.Divide each by the smallest number:
18.4
44.6
441641.5
6:4:18.4
CH3CCH
2BrCH3CH3CH3CCH
2BrBrCH3CH3CCH
2BrCH2BrCH2Br 1H1,1-dichloroethaneratio of protons    1:3
CH3CHCl
Cl1,2-dichloro-2-methylpropaneratio of protons  2:6   
  1:3
CH3CCH
2ClClCH31:3.
2:9.
2:8.8,
1.6:7.0
1:4.4.
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 539
540CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyMultiply by a number that will cause all the numbers to be close to whole numbers:The ratio gives the relative numbers of the different kinds of protons. The actual
ratio could be or even some higher multiple,but let
Õs not go there if we don
Õthave to.
b.The 
Ò3Ósuggests a methyl,the 
Ò2Óa methylene,and the 
Ò9Óa tert-butyl. The methyl is
closest to a group causing deshielding,and the 
tert-butyl group is farthest away from
the group causing deshielding. The following compound meets these requirements:
PROBLEM 16The NMR spectrum shown in Figure14.8corresponds to one of the following com-

pounds. Which compound is responsible for this spectrum?
 1HCH3CCH2COCH3CH3CH3O6:4:18,
3:2:94.6
291221.5
2387653210
4 (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.8
NMR spectrum for Problem 16. 1HCH3CCH
HCCCH
3CH2ClClCH2CHBr2Br2CHABCD
14.9Diamagnetic Anisotropy
The chemical shifts of hydrogens bonded to hybridized carbons are at a higher
frequency than one would predict,based on the electronegativity of the carbons.

For example,a hydrogen bonded to a terminal carbon of an alkene appears at

4.7ppm,a hydrogen bonded to an internal carbon appears at 5.3ppm,and a

hydrogen on abenzene ring appears at 6.5
Ð8.0ppm (Table14.1).
5.3 ppm4.7 ppmHCH3CH2CHCH
27.3 ppmsp2sp2sp2sp2BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 540
Section 14.10Splitting of the Signals
5413-D Molecule:Benzeneinduced magnetic fieldinduced magnetic fieldappliedmagnetic
fieldB0HHHHHHCCFigure 14.9
The magnetic fields induced byboth the electrons of a benzene

ring and the electrons of an

alkene in the vicinity of the
aromatic or vinylic protons are in
the same direction as the applied
magnetic field. Since a larger
effective magnetic field is sensed by

the protons, they resonate at
higher frequencies.ppThe unusual chemical shifts associated with hydrogens bonded to carbons that form
bonds are due to 
diamagnetic anisotropy.
Diamagnetic anisotropy
describes an en-vironment in which different magnetic fields are found at different points in space.

Anisotropic
is Greek for Òdifferent in different directions.
ÓBecause electrons are
less tightly held by nuclei than are electrons,electrons are more free to move

inresponse to a magnetic field. When a magnetic field is applied to a compound with
electrons,the electrons move in a circular path. This electron motion causes an in-
duced magnetic field. How this induced magnetic field affects the chemical shift of a

proton depends on the direction of the induced magnetic field
Ñin the region where
the proton is locatedÑrelative to the direction of the applied magnetic field.
Themagnetic field induced by the electrons of a benzene ring
Ñin the region
where benzeneÕs protons are locatedÑis oriented in the same direction as the applied
field (Figure14.9). The magnetic field induced by the electrons of an alkene
Ñin the
region where the protons bonded to the carbons of the alkene are located
Ñis also
oriented in the same direction as the applied field. Thus,in both cases,a larger effec-

tive magnetic field
Ñthe sum of the strengths of the applied field and the induced
field
Ñis sensed by the protons. Because frequency is proportional to the strength of
the magnetic field experienced by the protons,the protons resonate at higher frequen-

cies than they would have if the electrons had not induced a magnetic field.
psp2pppppspp3-D Molecule:[18]-AnnulenePROBLEM 17[18]-Annulene shows two signals in its NMR spectrum:one at 9.25ppm and the other
very far upfield (beyond TMS) at What hydrogens are responsible for each of

the signals? (Hint:Notice the direction of the induced magnetic field outside and inside the
benzene ring in Figure14.9.)
14.10Splitting of the SignalsNotice that the shapes of the signals in the NMR spectrum of 1,1-dichloroethane
(Figure14.10) are different from the shapes of the signals in the NMR spectrum of

1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane (Figure14.5). Both signals in Figure14.5are 
singlets(each composed of a single peak),whereas the signal for the methyl protons of
 1H 1HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH2.88 ppm. 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 541
542CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy87653210
4CH3CHCl2 (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.10
NMR spectrum of 1,1-dichloroethane. The higher-frequency signal is an example of a
quartet; the lower-frequency signal is a doublet.
 1H1,1-dichloroethane (the lower-frequency signal) is split into two peaks (a 
doublet),and the signal for the methine proton is split into four peaks (a quartet). (Magnifica-
tions of the doublet and quartet are shown as insets in Figure14.10.)
Splitting is caused by protons bonded to adjacent (i.e.,directly attached) carbons. The
splitting of a signal is described by the where 
Nis the number of 
equivalentprotons bonded to 
adjacentcarbons. By Òequivalent protons,
Ówe mean that the protonsbonded to an adjacent carbon are equivalent to each other,but not equivalent to the proton

giving rise to the signal. Both signals in Figure14.5are singlets because neither the

carbon adjacent to the methyl groups nor that adjacent to the methylene group in

1-bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane is bonded to any protons In

contrast,in Figure14.10,the carbon adjacent to the methyl group in 1,1-dichloroethane

isbonded to one proton,so the signal for the methyl protons is split into a doublet
The carbon adjacent to the carbon bonded to the methine pro-
ton is bonded to three equivalent protons,so the signal for the methine proton is split into

a quartet The number of peaks in a signal is called the

multiplicityof the signal. Splitting is always mutual:If the 
aprotons split the 
bprotons,then the bprotons must split the 
aprotons. The methine proton and the methyl protons are
an example of 
coupled protons
. Coupled protons
split each otherÕs signal.1314.1112.1011.N1 rule,An NMR signal is split into 
peaks, where 
Nis the number of equivalent protons bonded to adjacent

carbons.N11HKeep in mind that it is not the number of protons giving rise to a signal that
determines the multiplicity of the signal; rather,it is the number of protons bonded to

the immediately adjacent carbons that determines the multiplicity.
For example,the
signal for the aprotons in the following compound will be split into three peaks (a
triplet) because the adjacent carbon is bonded to two hydrogens. The signal for the 
bprotons will appear as a quartet because the adjacent carbon is bonded to three hydro-
gens,and the signal for the 
cprotons will be a singlet.More specifically,the splitting of signals occurs when different kinds of protons are
close enough for their magnetic fields to influence one another
Ñcalled spinÐspincoupling. For example,the frequency at which the methyl protons of 1,1-dichloro-
ethane show a signal is influenced by the magnetic field of the methine proton. If the

magnetic field of the methine proton aligns 
withthat of the applied magnetic field,it
will add to the applied magnetic field,causing the methyl protons to show a signal at a
abc
CH3CH2COCH3OBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 542
Section 14.10Splitting of the Signals
543frequencyif the magnetic fieldof the methine proton is
lined up against the applied
magnetic field, it will subtract
from the applied magnetic
field, so the adjacent methyl 
protons will show a signal at 
a slightly lower frequencychemical shift of the signal forthe methyl protons if there were
no protons on the adjacent 
carbondirection ofthe applied 
fieldif the magnetic field of the methine proton is in the 
same direction as the 
applied magnetic field, it 
will add to the applied 
magnetic field, so the 
adjacent methyl protons will 
show a signal at a slightly 
higher frequencyFigure 14.11
The signal for the methyl protons of 1,1-dichloroethane is split into a
doublet by the methine proton.chemical shift of the methine
proton if there were no protons 
on the adjacent carbonsignal for the methine proton is split into a quartetfrequencyFigure 14.12
The signal for the methine protonof 1,1-dichloroethane is split into a
quartet by the methyl protons.slightly higher frequency. On the other hand,if the magnetic field of the methine pro-
ton aligns against
the applied magnetic field,it will subtract from the applied magnet-
ic field and the methyl protons will show a signal at a lower frequency (Figure14.11).

Therefore,the signal for the methyl protons is split into two peaks,one corresponding

to the higher frequency and one corresponding to the lower frequency. Because each

spin state has almost the same population,about half the methine protons are lined up

with the applied magnetic field and about half are lined up against it. Therefore,the

two peaks of the 
doublethave approximately the same height and area.
Similarly,the frequency at which the methine proton shows a signal is influenced
by the magnetic fields of the three protons bonded to the adjacent carbon. The mag-

netic fields of each of the three methyl protons can align with the applied magnetic

field,two can align with the field and one against it,one can align with it and two

against it,or all three can align against it. Because the magnetic field that the methine

proton senses is affected in four different ways,its signal is a 
quartet(Figure14.12).
Therelative intensities of the peaks in a signal reflect the number of ways the
neighboring protons can be aligned relative to the applied magnetic field. For example,a
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 543
Table 14.2   Multiplicity of the Signal and Relative Intensities of the Peaks in
the SignalRelative peak
intensitiesMultiplicity ofthe signalNumber of equivalent
protons causing splitting
0singlet1
1doublet1:1

2triplet1:2:1

3quartet1:3:3:1

4quintet1:4:6:4:1

5sextet1:5:10:10:5:1

6septet1:6:15:20:15:6:1
544CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBlaise Pascal (1623
Ð1662)was bornin France. At age 16,he published a

book on geometry,and at 19,he

invented a calculating machine. 

He propounded the modern theory of

probability,developed the principle

underlying the hydraulic press,and

showed that atmospheric pressure

decreases as altitude increases. 

In 1644,he narrowly escaped death

when the horses leading a carriage in

which he was riding bolted. That

scare caused him to devote the rest of

his life to meditation and religious

writings.quartet has relative peak intensities of because there is only one way to align the
magnetic fields of three protons so that they are all with the field and only one way to

align them so that they are all against the field. However,there are three ways to align the

magnetic fields of three protons so that two are lined up with the field and one is lined up

against the field (Figure14.13). Likewise,there are three ways to align the magnetic fields

of three protons so that one is lined up with the field and two are lined up against it.
1:3:3:1Equivalent protons do not
split each otherÕs signal.Figure 14.13
The ways in which the magneticfields of three protons can be
aligned.Tutorial:
NMR signal splittingThe relative intensities obey the mathematical mnemonic known as 
Pascal
Õs trian-gle. (You may remember this mnemonic from one of your math classes.) According to
Pascal,each number at the bottom of a triangle in the rightmost column of Table14.2

is the sum of the two numbers to its immediate left and right in the row above it.
A signal for a proton is never split by 
equivalentprotons. Normally,
nonequivalentprotons split each otherÕs signal only if they are on 
adjacentcarbons. Splitting is aÒthrough-bondÓeffect,not a 
Òthrough-spaceÓeffect; it is rarely observed if the protons
are separated by more than three bonds. If,however,they are separated by more than

three bonds and one of the bonds is a double or triple bond,a small splitting is some-

times observed. This is called 
long-range coupling.sHbCCCCCHbHaCHbCHaCHa11122233344Ha and Hb split each otherÔs signal because they are 
separated by three    
bondsHa and Hb do not split each otherÔs signal because they 
are separated by four    bondsHa and Hb may split each otherÔs signal because they 
are separated by four bonds, 
including one double bondBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 544
Section 14.11More Examples of NMR Spectra
5451Ha.b.4876
9103210
5Offset: 1.7 ppm.
4876
9103210
5Offset: 2.4 ppm.
 (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequency3.93.83.7PPM
3.02.92.8PPM
4.64.54.4
1.81.7
1.91.6
PPMPPMFigure 14.14
NMR spectra for Problem 19. 1HPROBLEM 18Using a diagram like the one in Figure14.13,predict
a.the relative intensities of the peaks in a triplet
b.the relative intensities of the peaks in a quintet
PROBLEM 19The NMR spectra of two carboxylic acids with molecular formula are
shown in Figure14.14. Identify the carboxylic acids. (The 
Òoffset
Ónotation means that thesignal has been moved to the right by the indicated amount).
C3H5O2Cl 1H14.11More Examples of NMR Spectra
The NMR spectrum of bromomethane shows one singlet. The three methyl protons
are chemically equivalent,and chemically equivalent protons do not split each other
Õssignal. The four protons in 1,2-dichloroethane are also chemically equivalent,so its 

NMR spectrum also shows one singlet.
bromomethaneeach compound has an NMR spectrum that shows one singlet because equivalent protons do not split each otherÔs signalsCH3Br1,2-dichloroethaneClCH2CH2Cl 1H 1H1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 545
546CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy87653210
4OCHCH3COCH3CH2CH2CH3adb
bec (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.16
NMR spectrum ofisopropyl butanoate. 1HThere are two signals in the NMR spectrum of 1,3-dibromopropane (Figure14.15).
The signal for the protons is split into a triplet by the two hydrogens on the adjacent

carbon. The protons have two adjacent carbons that are bonded to protons. The

protons on one adjacent carbon are equivalent to the protons on the other adjacent car-

bon. Because the two sets of protons are equivalent,the rule is applied to both

sets at the same time. In other words,
Nis equal to the sum of the equivalent protons on
both carbons. So the signal for the protons is split into a quintet Inte-

gration confirms that two methylene groups contribute to the signal because twice as

many protons give rise to the signal as to the signal.
HHH415.H1HH 1H87653210
4BrCH
2CH2CH2Brababb (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.15
NMR spectrum of1,3-dibromopropane. 1HTheNMR spectrum of isopropyl butanoate shows five signals (Figure14.16).
The signal for the protons is split into a triplet by the protons. The signal for the
protons is split into a doublet by the proton. The signal for the protons is
split into a triplet by the protons,and the signal for the proton is split into a

septet by the protons. The signal for the protons is split by both the and 

protons. Because the and protons are not equivalent,the rule has to be

applied separately to each set. Thus,the signal for the protons will be split into a
H1HHHHHHHHHHHHH 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 546
Section 14.11More Examples of NMR Spectra
5471H87653210
4CCHHHCH2Brbdca (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.17
NMR spectrum of3-bromo-1-propene. 1Hquartet by the protons,and each of these four peaks will be split into a triplet by the
protons:As a result,the signal for the 
protons is a 
multiplet(a signal that is more complex that a triplet,quartet,quintet,
etc.). The reason we do not see 12 peaks is that some of them overlap (Section14.13).
PROBLEM 20Indicate the number of signals and the multiplicity of each signal in the NMR spectrum
of each of the following compounds:
a.b.c.
The NMR spectrum of 3-bromo-1-propene shows four signals (Figure14.17). Al-
though the and protons are bonded to the same carbon,they are not chemically

equivalent (one is cis to the bromomethyl group,the other is trans to the bromomethyl

group),so each produces a separate signal. The signal for the protons is split into a

doublet by the proton. Notice that the signals for the three vinylic protons are at rela-

tively high frequencies because of diamagnetic anisotropy (Section14.9). The signal for

the proton is a multiplet because it is split separately by the and protons.
HH, H,HHHHH 1HICH2CH2CHBr2ClCH2CH2CH2ClICH2CH2CH2Br 1HH114312.HHBecause the and protons are not equivalent,they split one another
Õs signal. This
means that the signal for the proton is split into a doublet by the proton and that

each of the peaks in the doublet is split into a doublet by the proton. The signal for the
proton should be what is called a 
doublet of doublets. The signal for the proton
should also be a doublet of doublets. However,the mutual splitting of the signals of two

nonidentical protons bonded to the same carbon,caused by what is called 
geminalcoupling,is often too small to be observed (Section14.12). Therefore,the signals for the
and protons in Figure14.17appear as doublets rather than as doublets of doublets.
(If the signals were expanded,the doublet of doublets would be observed.) 
Notice the difference between a quartet and a doublet of doublets. Both have four
peaks. A quartet results from splitting by 
three equivalent
adjacent protons; it hasrelative peak intensities of and the individual peaks are equally spaced. A

doublet of doublets,on the other hand,results from splitting by 
two nonequivalentadjacent protons; it has relative peak intensities of and the individual

peaks are not necessarily equally spaced (see Figure14.24).
a quartetrelative intensities:  1 : 3 : 3 : 1a doublet of doubletsrelative intensities:  1 : 1 : 1 : 11:1:1:1,
1:3:3:1,
HHsp2HHHHHHHBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 547
548CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyThere are five sets of chemically equivalent protons in ethylbenzene (Figure14.18).
We see the expected triplet for the protons and the quartet for the protons. (This is

a characteristic pattern for an ethyl group.) We expect the signal for the protons to be

a doublet and the signal for the proton to be a triplet. Because the and protons

are not equivalent,they must be considered separately in determining the splitting of the

signal for the protons. Therefore,we expect the signal for the protons to be split

into a doublet by the protons and each peak of the doublet to be split into another

doublet by the proton,forming a doublet of doublets. However,we do not see three

distinct signals for the and protons in Figure14.18. Instead,we see overlap-

ping signals. Apparently,the electronic effect (i.e.,the electron-donating/electron-

withdrawing ability) of an ethyl substituent is not sufficiently different from that of a

hydrogen to cause a difference in the environments of the and protons that is

large enough to allow them to appear as separate signals.
HH, H,HH, H,HHHHHHHHHH (ppm)4876
91053210
HHO2NHHHbcafrequencyFigure 14.19
NMR spectrum ofnitrobenzene. The
signals for the 
and protons do not

overlap.HcHa   , Hb   , 1H (ppm)87653210
4HHHCH2CH3HHbecddcafrequencyIn contrast to the and protons of ethylbenzene,the and 
protons of nitrobenzene show three distinct signals (Figure14.19),and the multiplicity

of each signal is what we predicted for the signals for the benzene ring protons in
HH, H,HH, H,Figure 14.18
NMR spectrum ofethylbenzene. The
signals for the 
and protons
overlap.HeHc   , Hd   , 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 548
Section 14.11More Examples of NMR Spectra
5491Hethylbenzene (is a doublet,is a triplet,and is a doublet of doublets). The
nitro group is sufficiently electron withdrawing to cause the and protons to

be in different enough environments that their signals do not overlap.
Notice that the signals for the benzene ring protons in Figures14.18and 14.19
occur in the 7.0
Ð8.5 ppm region. Other kinds of protons usually do not resonate in this
region,so signals in this region of an spectrum indicate that the compound

probably contains an aromatic ring.PROBLEM 21Explain why the signal for the protons identified as in Figure14.19appears at the
lowest frequency and the signal for the protons identified as appears at the highest

frequency. (
Hint:Draw the contributing resonance structures.)
PROBLEM 22How could spectra distinguish the following compounds?
PROBLEM 23How would the spectra for the four compounds with molecular formula
differ?
PROBLEM 24Identify each compound from its molecular formula and its spectrum:
 1H NMRC3H6Br2 1H NMRNO2NO2NO2BrBrBrABC 1H NMRHH 1H NMRHH, H,HHH4876
9103210
5C9H12a. (ppm)frequencyTutorial:
NMR spectrum assignmentBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 549
550CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy4876
9103210
54876
9103210
5C5H10Ob.C9H10O2c. (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequencyPROBLEM 25Predict the splitting patterns for the signals given by each of the compounds in Problem 3.
PROBLEM 26Identify the following compounds. (Relative integrals are given from left to right across the
spectrum.)a.The spectrum of a compound with molecular formula has two singlets
with an area ratio of b.The spectrum of a compound with molecular formula has two singlets
with an area ratio of c.The spectrum of a compound with molecular formula has two singlets
with an area ratio of PROBLEM 27Describe the spectrum you would expect for each of the following compounds,

using relative chemical shifts rather than absolute chemical shifts:
 1H NMR1:2.
C8H6O2 1H NMR2:3.
C6H10O2 1H NMR2:3.
C4H10O2 1H NMRTutorial:
NMR spectrum 
interpretationBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 550
Section 14.12Coupling Constants
551a.f.k.
b.g.l.
c.h.m.
d.i.n.
e.j.o.
14.12Coupling ConstantsThe distance,in hertz,between two adjacent peaks of a split NMR signal is called the
coupling constant(denoted by J). The coupling constant for being split by is
denoted by The signals of coupled protons (protons that split each other
Õs signal)have the same coupling constant; in other words,(Figure14.20). Coupling

constants are useful in analyzing complex NMR spectra because protons on adjacent

carbons can be identified by identical coupling constants.
The magnitude of a coupling constant is independent of the operating frequency of
the spectrometerÑthe same coupling constant is obtained from a 300-MHz instrument
as from a 600-MHz instrument. The magnitude of a coupling constant is a measure of

how strongly the nuclear spins of the coupled protons influence each other. It,there-

fore,depends on the number and type of bonds that connect the coupled protons,as

well as the geometric relationship of the protons. Characteristic coupling constants are

shown in Table14.3; they range from 0 to 15Hz.
The coupling constant for two nonequivalent hydrogens on the 
samecarbon isoften too small to be observed (Figure14.17),but it is large for nonequivalent hydrogens

bonded to adjacentcarbons. Apparently,the interaction between the hydrogens is
strongly affected by the intervening electrons. We have seen that electrons also allow

long-range couplingÑthat is,coupling through four or more bonds (Section14.10).
ppsp2sp2.HHOCH3CCH2COCH3OOCCHCl
ClH
CH3CHCHCl2ClCH3CCH2CH3BrCH3CCHCl
ClHCH3CH2OCH2ClOOCH3OCH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3CH2OCH2CH3CH3OCH2CH2CH2BrCH3CHCH2CHOCH3CCHCl
HHBrCH2CH2BrfrequencyCH3CHCl2abJbaJbaJabJbaFigure 14.20
The and protons of
1,1-dichloroethane are coupled
protons, so their signals have the
same coupling constant, JabJba.HbHaBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 551
PROBLEM 28Why is there no coupling between and or between and in 
cis- or trans
-3-chloropropenoic acid?LetÕs now summarize the kind of information that can be obtained from an 
spectrum:1.The number of signals indicates the number of different kinds of protons that are
in the compound. 1H NMRHHHH552CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyCoupling constants can be used to distinguish between the spectra of cis
and trans alkenes. The coupling constant of 
trans
-vinylic protons is significantly
greater than the coupling constant of 
cis-vinylic protons (Figure14.21),because the cou-
pling constant depends on the dihedral angle between the two bonds in the
unit. The coupling constant is greatest when the angle between 
the two bonds is 180
¡(trans) and smaller when it is 0
¡(cis). Notice the differ-
ence between and in the spectrum of 3-bromo-1-propene (Figure14.17).
CHHCCHCH 1H NMRTable 14.3Approximate Values of Coupling Constants
Approximate value of 
Jab (Hz)Approximate value of 
Jab (Hz)C7H0CHCHCCHHHCCC2(geminal coupling)H15 (trans)10 (cis)1(long-rangecoupling)ababababHCCHCCbHbCHaCHaabababbbaaabbcaJab  14 HzJba  14 HzcaJab  9 HzJba  9 HzHbHaCHClCOOHHCbCHClCHCOOHHbHatrans-3-chloropropenoic acidcis-3-chloropropenoic acidFigure 14.21
The doublets observed for the and protons in the NMR spectra of 
trans-3-chloropropenoic acid and cis-3-chloropropenoic acid. The coupling constant for transprotons (14Hz) is greater than the coupling constant for cis protons (9Hz).
 1HHbHaThe coupling contant for trans protons is
greater than the coupling constant for

cis protons.
The dependence of the couplingconstant on the angle between the twobonds is called the Karplusrelationship after 
Martin Karplus
,who first observed the relationship.

Karplus was born in 1930. He
received a B.A. from Harvard

University and a Ph.D. from the

California Institute of Technology. He

is currently a professor of chemistry at

Harvard University.
CHBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 552
 (ppm)8796543210
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% TransmittancefrequencyFigure 14.22
IR and NMR spectra for this problem-solving strategy.
 1HSection 14.12Coupling Constants
5532.The position of a signal indicates the kind of proton(s) responsible for the signal
(methyl,methylene,methine,allylic,vinylic,aromatic,etc.) and the kinds of

neighboring substituents.3.The integration of the signal tells the relative number of protons responsible for
the signal.4.The multiplicity of the signal tells the number of protons (
N) bonded toadjacent carbons.5.The coupling constants identify coupled protons.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Identify the compound with molecular formula that gives the IR and 
spectra in Figure14.22.
 1H NMRC9H10O1The best way to approach this kind of problem is to identify whatever structural features
you can from the molecular formula and IR spectrum and then use the information from

the spectrum to expand on that knowledge. From the molecular formula and IR

spectrum,we learn that the compound is a ketone:It has a carbonyl group at 

only one oxygen,and no absorption bands at and that would indicate

an aldehyde. That the carbonyl group absorption is at a lower frequency than normal sug-

gests that it has partial single-bond character as a result of electron delocalization
Ñindicating that it is attached to an carbon. The compound contains a benzene ring

(and ),and it has hydrogens bonded to carbons
In the NMR spectrum,the triplet at and the quartet at 
3.0 ppm1.2 ppm3000 cm1.sp31440 cm13000 cm1, 1600 cm1,sp22720 cm128201680 cm1, 1H NMRBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 553
554CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopyindicate the presence of an ethyl group that is attached to an electron-withdrawing group.
The signals in the 7.4
Ð8.0 ppm region confirm the presence of a benzene ring. From this
information,we can conclude that the compound is the following ketone. The integration

ratio confirms this answer.
Now continue on to Problem 29.
PROBLEM 29Identify the compound with molecular formula that gives the IR and 
spectra shown in Figure14.23.
 1H NMRC8H10OCCH2CH3O5:2:32.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance87653210
4 (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.23
IR and NMR spectra for Problem 29.
 1H14.13Splitting DiagramsThe splitting pattern obtained when a signal is split by more than one set of protons can
best be understood by using a splitting diagram. In a 
splitting diagram(also called asplitting tree
),the NMR peaks are shown as vertical lines and the effect of each of the
splittings is shown one at a time. For example,a splitting diagram is shown in

Figure14.24for splitting of the signal for the proton of 1,1,2-trichloro-3-methylbu-

tane into a doublet of doublets by the and protons.
HHHBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 554
Section 14.13Splitting Diagrams
555The signal for the protons of propyl bromide is split into a quartet by the protons,
and each of the resulting four peaks is split into a triplet by the protons (Figure14.25).

How many of the 12 peaks are actually seen depends on the relative magnitudes of the two

coupling constants,and For example,the figure shows that there are 12 peaks

when is much greater than 9 peaks when and only 6 peaks when
As you can see,the number of peaks actually observed depends on how many
overlap with one another. When peaks overlap,their intensities add together.
.2,,.HHHCH3CH3CHCHCHClClCl1,1,2-trichloro-3-methylbutanea doublet of doubletschemical shift of the signal for the Hc proton if there were no splittingsplitting by the Hb protona splitting diagramabcdsplitting by the Hd protonJcdJcdJcbHcfrequencyFigure 14.24
A splitting diagram for a doublet ofdoublets.propyl bromide12 peaks9 peaks6 peaks
CH3CH2CH2BrbacJbcJbaJba  JbcJba  2JbcJba  JbcHbHbHbJbcJbaJbcJbaFigure 14.25
A splitting diagram for a quartet of triplets. The number of peaks actually observed whena signal is split by two sets of protons depends on the relative magnitudes of the two
coupling constants.BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 555
Finding that the signal for the protons of 1-chloro-3-iodopropane is a quintet indicates
that and have about the same value. The splitting diagram shows that a quintet

results if We can conclude that 
when two different sets of protons split a signal,the multiplicity
of the signal should be determined by using therule separately for each set of

hydrogens when the coupling constants for the two sets are different. When the cou-

pling constants are similar,however,the multiplicity of a signal can be determined by

treating both sets of adjacent hydrogens as if they were equivalent.
In other words,the
rule can be applied to both sets of protons simultaneously.
PROBLEM 30SOLVED
The two hydrogens of a methylene group adjacent to an asymmetric carbon are not
equivalent hydrogens because they are in different environments due to the asymmetric

carbon. (You can verify this statement by examining molecular models.) Applying the
rule to these two diastereotopic hydrogens (Section5.16) separately in determining
11N1JabHaJacClCH2CH2CH2Iacb.H556CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyWe would expect the signal for the protons of 1-chloro-3-iodopropane to be a
triplet of triplets (split into nine peaks) because the signal would be split into a triplet by

the protons and each of the resulting peaks into a triplet by the protons. The signal,

however,is a quintet (Figure14.26).
HHH87653210
4ClCH2CH2CH2Iacb (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.26
NMR spectrum of 1-chloro-3-iodopropane. 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 556
Section 14.14Time Dependence of NMR Spectroscopy
557the multiplicity of the signal for the adjacent methyl hydrogens indicates that the signal
should be a doublet of doublets. The signal,however,is a triplet. Using a splitting diagram,

explain why it is a triplet rather than a doublet of doublets.
SOLUTIONThe observation of a triplet means that the rule did not have to be
applied to the diastereotopic hydrogens separately but could have been applied to the two

protons as a set (so ). This means that the coupling constant for split-

ting of the methyl signal by one of the methylene hydrogens is similar to the coupling con-

stant for splitting by the other methylene hydrogen.PROBLEM 31Draw a splitting diagram for where
a.and b.and 
14.14Time Dependence of NMR Spectroscopy
We have seen that the three methyl hydrogens of ethyl bromide give rise to one signal
in the NMR spectrum because they are chemically equivalent due to rotation about

the bond. At any one instant,however,the three hydrogens can be in quite

different environments:One can be anti to the bromine,one can be gauche to the

bromine,one can be eclipsed with the bromine.
An NMR spectrometer is very much like a camera with a slow shutter speed
Ñit is too
slow to be able to detect these different environments,so what it sees is an average

environment. Because each of the three methyl hydrogens has the same average envi-

ronment,we see one signal for the methyl group in the NMR spectrum.
Similarly,the NMR spectrum of cyclohexane shows only one signal,even
though cyclohexane has both axial and equatorial protons. There is only one signal be-

cause the interconversion of the chair conformers of cyclohexane occurs too rapidly at
 1H 1Hantigaucheeclipsed
HHHHBrHHHHHBrHHHHHBrHCC 1HCCC
HbHcHa12 Hz12 Hz6 Hz12 HzH,JabHaJac132,1nonequivalent protonsCH3CHCH2CH3Br*BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 557
49 C57 C60 C63 C68 C89 C558CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopyroom temperature to be detected by the NMR spectrometer. Because axial protons in
one chair conformer are equatorial protons in the other chair conformer,all the protons

in cyclohexane have the same average environment on the NMR time scale,so the

NMR spectrum shows one signal.
The rate of chairÐchair interconversion is temperature-dependent
Ñthe lower the
temperature,the slower is the rate of interconversion. has 11 deuteri-

ums,which means that it has only one hydrogen. NMR spectra of 

taken at various temperatures are shown in Figure14.27. Cyclohexane with only one

hydrogen was used for this experiment in order to prevent splitting of the signal,which

would have complicated the spectrum. Deuterium signals are not detectable in 

NMR,and splitting by a deuterium on the same or on an adjacent carbon is not

normally detectable at the operating frequency of an NMR spectrometer.
At room temperature,the NMR spectrum of shows one sharp
signal,which is an average for the axial proton of one chair and the equatorial proton

of the other chair. As the temperature decreases,the signal becomes broader and even-

tually separates into two signals,which are equidistant from the original signal. At
two sharp singlets are observed because at that temperature,the rate of
chairÐchair interconversion has decreased sufficiently to allow the two kinds of pro-
tons (axial and equatorial) to be individually detected on the NMR time scale.
14.15Protons Bonded to Oxygen and Nitrogen
The chemical shift of a proton bonded to an oxygen or a nitrogen depends on the degree
to which the proton is hydrogen bonded
Ñthe greater the extent of hydrogen bonding,
the greater is the chemical shiftÑbecause the extent of hydrogen bonding affects the
electron density around the proton. For example,the chemical shift of the OH proton of

an alcohol ranges from 2 to 5ppm; the chemical shift of the OH proton of a carboxylic

acid,from 10 to 12ppm; the chemical shift of the NH proton of an amine,from 1.5 to

4ppm; and the chemical shift of the NH proton of an amide,from 5 to 8ppm.
The NMR spectrum of pure dry ethanol is shown in Figure14.28(a),and the 
NMR spectrum of ethanol with a trace amount of acid is shown in Figure14.28(b).

The spectrum shown in Figure14.28(a)is what we would predict from what we have

learned so far. The signal for the proton bonded to oxygen is farthest downfield and is

split into a triplet by the neighboring methylene protons; the signal for the methylene
protons is split into a multiplet by the combined effects of the methyl protons and the

OH proton.The spectrum shown in Figure14.28(b)is the type of spectrum most often obtained
for alcohols. The signal for the proton bonded to oxygen is not split,and this proton

does not split the signal of the adjacent protons. So the signal for the OH proton is a

singlet,and the signal for the methylene protons is a quartet because it is split only by

the methyl protons.The two spectra differ because protons bonded to oxygen undergo 
proton exchange
,which means that they are transferred from one molecule to another. Whether the OH

proton and the methylene protons split each otherÕs signals depends on how long a par-
ticular proton stays on the OH group. 1H 1H89 ¡C,cyclohexane-11 1H 1H 1Hcyclohexane-11 1HCyclohexane-11chairÐchairinterconversionHHHHequatorialaxialaxialequatorialFigure 14.27
NMR spectra of cyclohexaneat various temperatures. -d11 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 558
Section 14.15Protons Bonded to Oxygen and Nitrogen
559In a sample of pure alcohol,the rate of proton exchange is very slow. This causes
the spectrum to look identical to one that would be obtained if proton exchange did not

occur. Acids and bases catalyze proton exchange,so if the alcohol is contaminated

with just a trace of acid or base,proton exchange becomes rapid. When proton ex-

change is rapid,the spectrum records only an average of all possible environments.

Therefore a rapidly exchanging proton is recorded as a singlet. The effect of a rapidly

exchanging proton on adjacent protons is also averaged. Thus,not only is its signal not

split by adjacent protons,the rapidly exchanging proton does not cause splitting.
The signal for an OH proton is often easy to spot in an NMR spectrum because it is
frequently somewhat broader than other signals (see the signal at 4.9 in Figure14.30(b)).

The broadening occurs because the rate of proton exchange is not slow enough to result in

a cleanly split signal,as in Figure14.28(a),or fast enough for a cleanly averaged signal,as

in Figure14.28(b). NH protons also show broad signals,not because of chemical

exchange,which is generally quite slow for NH,but because of quadrupolar relaxation.
d 1HROH
HHOHROH
HHOHROHHHOHmechanism for acid-catalyzed proton exchange8a.b.7653210
4CH3CH2OH87653210
4CH3CH2OH (ppm)frequency (ppm)freqeny
Figure 14.28
(a)NMR spectrum of pure ethanol. (b)NMR spectrum of ethanol containing a trace
amount of acid. 1H 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 559
560CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyPROBLEM 32Explain why the chemical shift of the OH proton of a carboxylic acid is at a higher fre-quency than the chemical shift of an OH proton of an alcohol.
PROBLEM 33Which would show the signal for the OH proton at a greater chemical shift,the NMR

spectrum of pure ethanol or the NMR spectrum of ethanol dissolved in 
PROBLEM 34Propose a mechanism for base-catalyzed proton exchange.
PROBLEM 35Identify the compound with molecular formula responsible for the NMR

spectrum in Figure14.29.
 1HC3H7NOCH2Cl2  ? 1H 1H87653210
4(ppm)frequencyFigure 14.29
NMR spectrum for Problem 35. 1H14.16Use of Deuterium in NMR Spectroscopy
Because deuterium signals are not seen in an NMR spectrum,substituting a deu-
terium for a hydrogen is a technique used to identify signals and to simplify NMR

spectra (Section14.14).
If after an alcohol
Õs NMR spectrum is obtained,a few drops of are added
to the sample and the spectrum is taken again,the OH signal can be identified. It will

be the signal that becomes less intense (or disappears) in the second spectrum because

of the proton exchange process just discussed. This technique can be used with any

proton that undergoes exchange.
If the NMR spectrum of were compared with the NMR
spectrum of the signal at the highest frequency in the first spectrum

would be absent in the second spectrum,indicating that this signal corresponds to the

methylene group. Deuterium substitution can be a helpful technique in the analysis of
complicated NMR spectra.
 1HCH3CD2OCH3, 1HCH3CH2OCH3 1HORHO
DDORDO
DHD2O 1H 1H 1H1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 560
8a.b.7653210
487653210
4CHCH2CH3CH3OHCHCH2CH3CH3OHecabd (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequencySection 14.17Resolution of NMR Spectra
561 1HThe sample used to obtain an NMR spectrum is made by dissolving the com-
pound in an appropriate solvent. Solvents with protons cannot be used since the sig-

nals for solvent protons would be very intense because there is more solvent than

compound in a solution. Therefore,deuterated solvents such as and are

commonly used in NMR spectroscopy.
14.17Resolution of NMR Spectra
The NMR spectrum of 2-
sec-butylphenol taken on a 60-MHz NMR spectrometer
is shown in Figure14.30(a),and the NMR spectrum of the same compound taken

on a 300-MHz instrument is shown in Figure14.30(b). Why is the resolution (separa-

tion of the signals) of the second spectrum so much better? 1H 1H1HD2OCDCl3 1HFigure 14.30
(a)60-MHz NMR spectrum of 2-
sec-butylphenol. (b)300-MHz NMR spectrum of
2-sec-butylphenol. 1H 1HTo observe separate signals with 
ÒcleanÓsplitting patterns,the difference in the
chemical shifts of two adjacent protons (in Hz) must be at least 10 times the value

of the coupling constant (
J). The signals in Figure14.31show that as decreases,
the two signals appear closer to each other and the outer peaks of the signals become

less intense while the inner peaks become more intense. The quartet and triplet of the

ethyl group are clearly observed only when is greater than 10.
nnnBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 561
562CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopyba  /J  20CH3CH2X  100 HzJab  5.0 Hz  /J  5  25 Hz  /J  3  15 Hz  /J  2  10 Hz  /J  1  5 HzFigure 14.31
The splitting pattern of an ethylgroup as a function of the 
ratio.nJThe difference in the chemical shifts of the and protons of 2-
sec-butylphenol
is 0.8ppm,which corresponds to 48Hz in a 60-MHz spectrometer and 240Hz in a

300-MHz spectrometer (Section14.5). Coupling constants are independent of the op-

erating frequency,so is 7Hz,whether the spectrum is taken on a 60-MHz or a

300-MHz instrument. Only in the case of the 300-MHz spectrometer is the difference

in chemical shift more than 10 times the value of the coupling constant,so only in the

300-MHz spectrum do the signals show clean splitting patterns.
in a 300-MHz spectrometerin a 60-MHz spectrometer
14.18NMR Spectroscopy
The number of signals in a NMR spectrum tells you how many different kinds of
carbons a compound hasÑjust as the number of signals in an NMR spectrum tells
you how many different kinds of hydrogens a compound has. The principles behind
 1H 13C 13Cn4876.9n240734HHBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 562
Section 14.18NMR Spectroscopy
563 13CNMR and NMR spectroscopy are essentially the same. There are,however,
some differences that make NMR easier to interpret.
The development of NMR spectroscopy as a routine analytical procedure was not
possible until computers were available that could carry out a Fourier transform

(Section14.2). NMR requires Fourier transform techniques because the signals ob-

tained from a single scan are too weak to be distinguished from background electronic

noise. However,FT
ÐNMR scans can be repeated rapidly,so a large number of scans
can be recorded and added. signals stand out when hundreds of scans are added,

because electronic noise is random,so its sum is close to zero. Without Fourier trans-

form,it could take days to record the number of scans required for a NMR spectrum.
The individual signals are weak because the isotope of carbon that gives
rise to NMR signals constitutes only 1.11% of carbon atoms (Section13.3). (The

most abundant isotope of carbon,has no nuclear spin and therefore cannot produce

an NMR signal.) The low abundance of means that the intensities of the signals in
NMR compared with those in NMR are reduced by a factor of approximately
100. In addition,the gyromagnetic ratio () of is about one-fourth that of and

the intensity of a signal is proportional to Therefore,the overall intensity of a 

signal is about 6400 times less than the intensity of an signal.
One advantage to NMR spectroscopy is that the chemical shifts range over
about 220 ppm,compared with about 12ppm for NMR (Table14.1). This means

that signals are less likely to overlap. The NMR chemical shifts of different kinds

of carbons are shown in Table14.4. The reference compound used in NMR is

TMS,the reference compound also used in NMR. Notice that ketone and aldehyde

carbonyl groups can be easily distinguised from other carbonyl groups.
A disadvantage of NMR spectroscopy is that,unless special techniques are
used,the area under a NMR signal is not proportional to the number of atoms
 13C 13C 1H 13C 13C 1H 13C 1H100444 13Cg3. 1H, 13Cg 1H 13C 13C 12C, 13C(13C) 13C 13C 13C 13C 13C 13C 13C 13C 1HApproximate Values of Chemical Shifts for 
13C NMRApproximate
chemical shift (ppm)Approximate
chemical shift (ppm)Type of

carbonType of
carbonOCNRRRRROCROOCHOOCHOCR(CH3)4Si0
CH3RRRRRR8Ð35CH2CH15Ð5020Ð60C100Ð150110Ð170CI0Ð40CBr
25Ð65CCl
35Ð80CN40Ð60CCO50Ð80165Ð175C65Ð85C30Ð40RRRR165Ð175175Ð185190Ð200205Ð220Table 14.4
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 563
564CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopygiving rise to the signal. Thus,the number of carbons giving rise to a NMR signal
cannot routinely be determined by integration.
The NMR spectrum of 2-butanol is shown in Figure14.32. 2-Butanol has car-
bons in four different environments,so there are four signals in the spectrum. The rela-

tive positions of the signals depend on the same factors that determine the relative

positions of the proton signals in NMR. Carbons in electron-dense environments pro-

duce low-frequency signals,and carbons close to electron-withdrawing groups produce

high-frequency signals. This means that the signals for the carbons of 2-butanol are in

the same relative order that we would expect for the signals of the protons on those car-

bons in the NMR spectrum. Thus,the carbon of the methyl group farther away from

the electron-withdrawing OH group gives the lowest-frequency signal. As the frequency

increases,the other methyl carbon comes next,followed by the methylene carbon; and

the carbon attached to the OH group gives the highest-frequency signal.
 1H 1H 13C 13C806040200
abdc
CH3CHCH2CH3OH (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.32
Proton-decoupled spectrum of 2-butanol.
 13C NMRabdcabdc
CH3CHCH2CH3OH806040200
 (ppm)frequencyFigure 14.33
Proton-coupled spectrum of 2-butanol. If the spectrometer is run in a 
proton-coupled mode, splitting is observed in a spectrum.
 13C NMR 13C NMRThe signals are not normally split by neighboring carbons because there is little like-
lihood of an adjacent carbon being a The probability of two carbons being 

next to each other is (about 1 in 10,000). (Because does not have a

magnetic moment,it cannot split the signal of an adjacent )
 13C. 12C1.11%1.11% 13C 13C.BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 564
Section 14.18NMR Spectroscopy
565 13CPROBLEM 36Answer the following questions for each of the compounds:
a.How many signals are in the NMR spectrum?
b.Which signal is at the lowest frequency?
1.5.9.
2.6.10.
3.7.
4.8.
CH3CCH2CH2CCH3OOCH2CHBrClCH3CH2OCH3CH3CHCH3BrCH3CHCHCH3O(CH3)2CCH2CH3COCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2COCH3OCH3CH2CH2Br 13CFigure 14.34
Proton-decoupled spectrum of 2,2-dimethylbutane.
 13C NMRThe signals in a NMR spectrum can be split by nearby hydrogens. However,
this splitting is not usually observed because the spectra are recorded using spin-de-

coupling,which obliterates the carbon
Ðproton interactions. Thus,all the signals are
singlets in an ordinary NMR spectrum (Figure14.32).
If the spectrometer is run in a 
proton-coupled
mode,the signals show spin
Ðspin split-ting. The splitting is not caused by adjacent carbons,but by the hydrogens bonded to the

carbon that produces the signal. The multiplicity of the signal is determined by the 

rule. The 
proton-coupled NMR spectrum
of 2-butanol is shown in Figure14.33.
(The triplet at 78ppm is produced by the solvent,) The signals for the methyl car-

bons are each split into a quartet because each methyl carbon is bonded to three hydrogens
The signal for the methylene carbon is split into a triplet and the signal for the carbon bonded to the OH group is split into a doublet 
The NMR spectrum of 2,2-dimethylbutane is shown in Figure14.34. The three
methyl groups at one end of the molecule are equivalent,so they all appear at the same

chemical shift. The intensity of a signal is somewhat related to the number of carbons

giving rise to the signal; consequently,the signal for these three methyl groups is the

most intense signal in the spectrum. The tiny signal is for the quaternary carbon;

carbons that are not attached to hydrogens give very small signals. Becasue they are

attached to a quaternary carbon,their signal appears at a higher frequency than that of

the other methyl group (Table 14.4).
 13C112.213,314.CDCl3. 13C1 13C 13CMissing Art 
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 565
PROBLEM 37Describe the proton-coupled NMR spectrum for compounds 1,3,and 5 in Problem 36,
showing relative values (not absolute values) of chemical shifts.
PROBLEM 38How can 1,2-,1,3-,and 1,4-dinitrobenzene be distinguished by
a.NMR spectroscopy?b.NMR spectroscopy?
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Identify the compound with molecular formula that gives the following
NMR spectrum:First,pick out the signals that can be absolutely identified. For example,the two oxygen
atoms in the molecular formula and the carbonyl carbon signal at 166ppm indicate that the

compound is an ester. The four signals at about 130ppm suggest that the compound has a

benzene ring with a single substituent. (One signal is for the carbon to which the sub-

stituent is attached,one is for the ortho carbons,one is for the meta carbons,and one is for

the para carbon.) Now subtract the molecular formula of those pieces from the molecular

formula of the compound. Subtracting and from the molecular formula leaves
the molecular formula of an ethyl substituent. Therefore,we know that the com-
pound is either ethyl benzoate or phenyl propanoate.
Seeing that the methylene group is at about 60 ppm indicates that it is adjacent to an
oxygen. Thus,the compound is ethyl benzoate.
Now continue on to Problem 39.
PROBLEM 39Identify each compound in Figure14.35from its molecular formula and its NMR
spectrum. 13CCOCH2CH3CH3CH2COethyl benzoatephenyl propanoate
OOC2H5,CO2C6H5 13CC9H10O2   13C 1H 13C566CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy200180160140120806040200
100 (ppm)frequencyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 566
2001751501257550250
100C8H9Brb.C6H10Oc. (ppm)frequency200180160140120806040200
100 (ppm)frequency212806040200
210 (ppm)frequencyC11H22Oa.Figure 14.35
The spectra for Problem 39.
13C NMR
Section 14.18NMR Spectroscopy
567 13CBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 567
568CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy14.19DEPT NMR SPECTRA
A technique called DEPT NMR has been developed to distinguish among 
and CH groups. (DEPT stands for distortionless enhancement by polarization
transfer.) It is now much more widely used than proton coupling to determine the

number of hydrogens attached to a carbon.The of citronellal is shown in Figure14.36. A DEPT 
NMR shows four spectra of the same compound. The bottommost spectrum shows signals

for all carbons that are covalently bonded to hydrogens.
The next-to-the-bottom spectrum
is run under conditions that allow only signals resulting from CH carbons to appear. The

third spectrum is run under conditions that allow only signals produced by carbons to

appear,and the top spectrum shows only signals produced by carbons. Information
CH3CH2 13CDEPT 13C NMR spectrumCH2,CH3, 13C13C2001751501257550250
100IntensityC6H12d. (ppm)frequencyCOHppmCH3 carbonsCH2 carbonsCH carbons
all protonated carbons40200
6010012080
140180200160
Figure 14.36
DEPT spectrum of
citronellal. 13C NMRFigure 14.35 (continued)
The spectra for Problem 39.
13C NMR
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 568
from the upper three spectra lets you determine whether a signal in a NMR spectrum
is produced by a or CH carbon.
Notice that a DEPT NMR spectrum does 
notshow a signal for a carbon that is
not attached to a hydrogen. For example,the NMR spectrum of 2-butanone shows

four signals because it has four nonequivalent carbons,whereas the DEPT NMR

spectrum of 2-butanone shows only three signals because the carbonyl carbon is not

bonded to a hydrogen,so it will not produce a signal.
14.20Two-Dimensional NMR Spectroscopy
Complex molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids are difficult to analyze by NMR
because the signals in their NMR spectra overlap. Such compounds are now being

analyzed by two-dimensional (2-D) NMR. Unlike X-ray crystallography,
2-D NMRtechniques allow scientists to determine the structures of complex molecules in solu-

tion. Such a determination is particularly important for biological molecules whose

properties depend on how they fold in water. More recently,3-D and 4-D NMR spec-

troscopy have been developed and can be used to determine the structures of highly

complex molecules. A thorough discussion of 2-D NMR is beyond the scope of this

book,but the discussion that follows will give you a brief introduction to this increas-

ingly important spectroscopic technique.The NMR and NMR spectra discussed in the preceding sections have one
frequency axis and one intensity axis; 2-D NMR spectra have two frequency axes and

one intensity axis. The most common 2-D spectra involve shift correlations;

they identify protons that are coupled (i.e.,that split each other
Õs signal). This is called
shift-correlated spectroscopy,which is known by the acronym COSY.
A portion of the COSY spectrumof ethyl vinyl ether is shown in Figure14.37(a);
it looks like a mountain range viewed from the air because intensity is the third axis.

These Òmountain-like
Óspectra (known as 
stack plots
) are not the spectra actually used
to identify a compound. Instead,the compound is identified using a contour plot

(Figure14.37(b)),where each mountain in Figure14.37(a)is represented by a large

dot (as if its top had been cut off). The two mountains shown in Figure14.37(a)

correspond to the dots labeled B and C in Figure14.37(b).
 1HÐ1H 1HÐ1H 13C 1H 13C 13C 13CCH2,CH3, 13CSection 14.20Two-Dimensional NMR Spectroscopy
569dceba6edcCAbBa5CCa.4.34.03.7 ppm
6.37ppmHHHOCH2CH3b.4321
ppmppm654321
abcdeFigure 14.37
(a)COSY spectrum of ethyl vinyl ether (stack plot). (b)COSY spectrum of ethyl vinyl ether
(contour plot). In a COSY spectrum, an spectrum is plotted on both the 
x-and
y-axes. Cross peaks Band Crepresent the mountains in (a). 1H NMRBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 569
PROBLEM 40Identify pairs of coupled protons in 2-methyl-3-pentanone,using the COSY spectrum in
Figure14.39.
570CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyInthe contour plot (Figure 14.37(b)),the usual one-dimensional NMR spectrum
is plotted on both the 
x- and y-axes. To analyze the spectrum,a diagonal line is drawn
through the dots that bisect the spectrum. The dots that are 
noton the diagonal (A,B,C)
are called cross peaks.
Cross peaks indicate pairs of protons that are coupled. For exam-
ple,if we start at the cross peak labeled A and draw a straight line parallel to the 
y-axisback to the diagonal,we hit the dot on the diagonal at produced by the 

protons. If we next go back to A and draw a straight line parallel to the 
x-axis back to the
diagonal,we hit the dot on the diagonal at produced by the protons. This

means that the and protons are coupled. If we then go to the cross peak labeled B

and draw two perpendicular lines back to the diagonal,we see that the and pro-

tons are coupled; the cross peak labeled C shows that the and protons are cou-

pled. Notice that we used only cross peaks below the diagonal; the cross peaks above the

diagonal give the same information. Notice also that there is no cross peak due to the

coupling of and consistent with the absence of coupling for two protons bonded

to an carbon in the one-dimensional NMR spectrum shown in Figure14.17.
The COSY spectrum of 1-nitropropane is shown in Figure14.38. Cross peak A
shows that the and protons are coupled,and cross peak B shows that the 

and protons are coupled. Notice that the two triangles in the figure have a com-

mon vertex,since the protons are coupled to both the and protons.
HHHHHHH 1Hsp2H,HHHHHHHH3.8 ppmH1.1 ppm 1H4.04.55.05.5caAb3.5CH3CH2CH2NO23.02.52.0
ppmBppm5.55.04.54.03.53.0
2.5
2.0cabbcaFigure 14.38
COSY spectrum of 1-nitropropane.2.62.2
CH3CHCCH2CH3CH31.81.41.0
ppmppm2.62.21.81.41.0
Ocdabbbdca
cdabFigure 14.39
COSY spectrum for Problem 40.Tutorial:
2-D NMRBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 570
Section 14.21Magnetic Resonance Imaging
571cdab35D3025201510
402.82.62.42.22.01.81.71.61.41.21.00.8
0.6ppmppmCBACH3CHCCH2CH3CH3Obdca
13C1HFigure 14.40
HETCOR spectrum of 2-methyl-3-pentanone. A HETCOR
spectrum indicates coupling
between protons and the carbons
to which they are attached.2-D NMR spectra that show shift correlations are called HETCOR (from
heteronuclear correlation) spectra. 
HETCOR spectraindicate coupling betweenprotons and the carbon to which they are attached.
The HETCOR spectrum of 2-methyl-3-pentanone is shown in Figure14.40. The
NMR spectrum is shown on the 
x-axis and the NMR spectrum is shown on
the y-axis. The cross peaks in a HETCOR spectrum identify which hydrogens are
attached to which carbons. For example,cross peak A indicates that the hydrogens

that show a signal at in the NMR spectrum are bonded to the carbon

that shows a signal at in the NMR spectrum. Cross peak C shows that

the hydrogens that show a signal at are bonded to the carbon that shows a

signal at 34 ppm.2.5 ppm 13C6 ppm 1H0.9 ppm 1H 13C 13CÐ1HClearly,2-D NMR techniques are not necessary for assigning the signals in the NMR
spectrum of a simple compound such as 2-methyl-3-pentanone. However,in the case of

many complicated molecules,signals can be assigned only with the aid of 2-D NMR.
Spectra showing shift correlations (called 2-D 
INADEQUATE
spectra)identify directly bonded carbons. There also are spectra in which chemical shifts are

plotted on one of the frequency axes and coupling constants on the other. Other 2-D

spectra involve the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOESY for very large molecules,

ROESY for mid-size molecules).
3These spectra are used to locate protons that are
close together in space.14.21Magnetic Resonance ImagingNMR has become an important tool in medical diagnosis because it allows physi-
cians to probe internal organs and structures without invasive surgical methods or

the harmful ionizing radiation of X-rays. When NMR was first introduced into

clinical practice in 1981,the selection of an appropriate name was a matter of 

some debate. Because some members of the public associate nuclear processes

with harmful radiation,the 
ÒNÓwas dropped from the medical application of NMR,
now known as 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
. The spectrometer is called an
MRI scanner.An MRI scanner consists of a magnet sufficiently large to accommodate an entire
patient,along with additional coils for exciting the nuclei,modifying the magnetic

field,and receiving signals. Different tissues yield different signals,which are separat-

ed into components by Fourier transform analysis. Each component can be attributed

to a specific site of origin in the patient,allowing a cross-sectional image of the pa-

tientÕs body to be constructed. 13C 13CÐ13C3NOESY and ROESY are the acronyms for nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy and rotation-
frame Overhauser effect spectroscopy.
Albert Warner Overhauser
wasborn in San Diego in 1925. He was 

a professor of physics at Cornell

University from 1953 to 1958. From

1958 to 1973 he was the director 

of the Physical Science Laboratory of

Ford Motor Company. Since 1973 he

has been a professor of physics at

Purdue University.
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 571
572CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyAn MRI may be taken in any plane,essentially independently of the patient
Õs posi-tion,allowing optimum visualization of the anatomical feature of interest. By contrast,

the plane of a computed tomography (CT) scan,which uses X-rays,is defined by the

position of the patient within the machine and is usually perpendicular to the long axis

of the body. CT scans in other planes may be obtained only if the patient is a skilled

contortionist.Most of the signals in an MRI scan originate from the hydrogens of water mole-
cules because these hydrogens are far more abundant in tissues than are the hydrogens

of organic compounds. The difference in the way water is bound in different tissues is

what produces much of the variation in signal among organs,as well as the variation

between healthy and diseased tissue (Figure14.41). MRI scans,therefore,can some-

times provide much more information than images obtained by other means. For ex-

ample,MRI can provide detailed images of blood vessels. Flowing fluids such as

blood respond differently to excitation in an MRI scanner than do stationary tissues

and normally do not produce a signal. However,the data may be processed to elimi-

nate signals from motionless structures,thereby showing signals only from the fluids.

This technique is sometimes used instead of more invasive methods to examine the

vascular tree. It is now possible to completely suppress the signal from certain types of

tissue (usually fat). It is also possible to differentiate intracellular and extracellular

edema,which is important in assessing patients suspected of having suffered strokes.
The versatility of MRI has been enhanced by the use of gadolinium as a contrast
reagent. Gadolinium,a paramagnetic metal,modifies the magnetic field in its immedi-

ate vicinity,altering the signal from hydrogen nuclei in close proximity. The distribu-

tion of gadolinium,which is infused into a patient
Õs veins,may be modified by certain
disease processes,such as cancer and inflammation. These abnormal distributions ap-

pear in the images obtained from appropriate scanning techniques.NMR spectroscopy using is not yet in routine clinical use,but is being used
widely in clinical research. It is of particular interest because ATP and ADP

(Sections17.20and 27.2) are involved in most metabolic processes,so it will provide

a way to investigate cellular metabolism.
 31PFigure 14.41
(a)MRI of a normal brain. The
pituitary is highlighted (pink).
(b)MRI of an axial section through

the brain showing a tumor (purple)
surrounded by damaged, fluid-filled
tissue (red).SummaryNMR spectroscopy
is used to identify the carbonÐhydro-gen framework of an organic compound. When a sample

is placed in a magnetic field,protons aligning with the

field are in the lower-energy those aligning
A-spin state;against the field are in the higher-energy 
The energy difference between the spin states depends on

the strength of the applied magnetic field
. When subject-
ed to radiation with energy corresponding to the energy
B-spin state.BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 572
Key Terms
573Key Terms
applied magnetic field (p.527)
chemically equivalent protons (p.531)

chemical shift (p.533)
NMR (p.527)
COSY spectrum (p.569)

coupled protons (p.542)

coupling constant (p.551)

DEPT NMR spectrum (p.568)

diamagnetic anisotropy (p.541)

diamagnetic shielding (p.530)

2-D NMR (p.569)

doublet (p.542)

doublet of doublets (p.547)

downfield (p.531)

effective magnetic field (p.530)

Fourier transform NMR (FT
ÐNMR) 13C 13Cspectrum (p.530)
geminal coupling (p.547)

gyromagnetic ratio (p.528)

HETCOR spectrum (p.571)
NMR (p.526)
integration (p.539)

long-range coupling (p.544)

magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)(p.571)
methine hydrogen (p.536)

MRI scanner (p.571)

multiplet (p.547)

multiplicity (p.542)
rule (p.542)
NMR spectroscopy (p.526)

operating frequency (p.528)
1 1Hproton-coupled NMR spectrum
(p.565)
proton exchange (p.558)

quartet (p.542)

reference compound (p.533)

rf radiation (p.527)

singlet (p.541)
state (p.527)
state (p.527)
spinÐspin coupling (p.542)
splitting diagram (p.554)

splitting tree (p.554)

triplet (p.542)

upfield (p.531)
b-spin
a-spin
 13Cdifference between the spin states,nuclei in the 
state are promoted to the state. When they return to

their original state,they emit signals whose frequency

depends on the difference in energy between the spin

states. An NMR spectrometer
detects and displays thesesignals as a plot of their frequency versus their intensity
Ñan NMR spectrum.Each set of chemically equivalent protons gives rise to
a signal,so the number of signals in an NMR spec-

trum indicates the number of different kinds of protons in

a compound. The 
chemical shiftis a measure of how far
the signal is from the reference TMS signal. The chemi-

cal shift is independent of the 
operating frequency
of the spectrometer.
The larger the magnetic field sensed by the proton,the
higher is the frequency of the signal. The electron density

of the environment in which the proton is located 
shieldsthe proton from the applied magnetic field. Therefore,a

proton in an electron-dense environment shows a signal

at a lower frequency than a proton near electron-with-

drawing groups. Low-frequency (upfield) signals have

small (ppm) values; high-frequency (downfield) signals

have large values. Thus,the position of a signal indi-

cates the kind of proton(s) responsible for the signal and

the kinds of neighboring substituents. In a similar envi-

ronment,the chemical shift of methyl protons is at a

lower frequency than that of methylene protons,which in

turn is at a lower frequency than that of a methine proton.

Diamagnetic anisotropy
causes unusual chemical shifts
for hydrogens bonded to carbons that form bonds.

Integrationtells us the relative number of protons that
give rise to each signal.
The multiplicityof a signal (the number of peaks in thesignal) indicates the number of protons bonded to adjacent
pddd 1Hb-spina-spincarbons. Multiplicity is described by the 
where Nis the number of equivalent protons bonded to
adjacent carbons. A 
splitting diagramcan help us under-stand the splitting pattern obtained when a signal is split
by more than one set of protons. Deuterium substitution

can be a helpful technique in the analysis of complicatedNMR spectra.The coupling constant(J) is the distance betweentwo adjacent peaks of a split NMR signal. Coupling

constants are independent of the operating frequency of

the spectrometer. Coupled protons have the same

coupling constant. The coupling constant for trans pro-

tons is greater than that for cis protons. When two differ-

ent sets of protons split a signal,the multiplicity of the

signal is determined by using the rule separately

for each set of hydrogens when the coupling constants

for the two sets are different. When the coupling con-

stants are similar,the rule can be applied to both

sets simultaneously.
The chemical shift of a proton bonded to an O or an N
depends on the degree to which the proton is hydrogen

bonded. In the presence of trace amounts of acid or base,
protons bonded to oxygen undergo 
proton exchange
. Inthat case,the signal for a proton bonded to an O is not

split and does not split the signal of adjacent protons.The number of signals in a NMR spectrum tells
how many different kinds of carbons a compound has.

Carbons in electron-dense environments produce low-fre-

quency signals; carbons close to electron-withdrawing

groups produce high-frequency signals. Chemical shifts

for NMR range over about 220ppm,compared with

about 12ppm for NMR. NMR signals are not nor-

mally split by neighboring carbons,unless the spectrom-

eter is run in a proton-coupled mode. 13C 1H 13C 13C11 1HN1 rule,BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 573
574CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyProblems
41.How many signals are produced by each of the following compounds in its
a.NMR spectrum?b.NMR spectrum?
1.3.5.
2.4.6.
42.Draw a splitting diagram for the proton and indicate its multiplicity if
a.b.
43.Label each set of chemically equivalent protons,using 
afor the set that will be at the lowest frequency (farthest upfield) in 
the NMR spectrum,
bfor the next,etc. Indicate the multiplicity of each signal.
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
44.Match each of the NMR spectra on page 575 with one of the following compounds:
CH3CH2CCH2CH3OCH3CH2CCH3OCH3CNO2CH3CH3CH3CHBrCH3CH2CH2NO2CH3CH2NO2CH3 1HClCH
2CH2CH2CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2CCH2ClOCH3CH2CH2OCH3ClCH2CCHCl2CH3CH3CH3CHCCH2CH2CH3CH3OCH3CHNO2CH3 1HHaCCCX
HaHaHbHcXX2HOCOOCH2CH3ClOOOCHCH3CH3CH3 13C 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 574
Problems57587653210
4c.frequency (ppm)87653210
4b.frequency (ppm)87653210
4a.frequency (ppm)BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 575
576CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy45.Determine the ratios of the chemically nonequivalent protons in a compound if the steps of the integration curves measure 40
.5,27,
13,and 118mm,from left to right across the spectrum. Give the structure of a compound whose NMR spectrum would show

these integrals in the observed order.
46.How could NMR distinguish between the compounds in each of the following pairs?
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.i.
e.47.Answer the following questions:
a.What is the relationship between chemical shift in ppm and operating frequency?

b.What is the relationship between chemical shift in hertz and operating frequency?

c.What is the relationship between coupling constant and operating frequency?

d.How does the operating frequency in NMR spectroscopy compare with the operating frequency in IR and UV/Vis spectroscopy?
48.The NMR spectra of three isomers with molecular formula are shown here. Which isomer produces which spectrum?
87653210
4a. (ppm)frequencyC4H9Br 1HCH3andCCH3CH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH3andHClCl
HHClH
ClOCH3CCOCH
3andCH3CH3CH3CCH3OCH3OCH3ClClCH3andHDHClClCH3DHHCH3CHCHCH
3andCH3CH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3CH3andCH3CHClCH3CH3CDClCH3BrCH2CH2CH2BrandBrCH2CH2CH2NO2andCH3CH2CH2OCH3andCH3CH2OCH2CH3 1H 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 576
Problems57749.Identify each of the following compounds from the NMR data and molecular formula. The number of hydrogens responsible
for each signal is shown in parentheses.
a.1.97ppm (6) singletb.2.01ppm (3) doubletc.1.15ppm (3) triplet
3.89ppm (2) singlet5.14ppm(1) quartet1.25ppm(3) triplet
7.35ppm (5) broad singlet2.33ppm (2) quartet
4.13ppm (2) quartet
50.Identify the compound with molecular formula that gives the following proton-coupled NMR spectrum.
80210Solvent60200
40 (ppm)frequency 13CC7H14OC5H10O2C8H9BrC4H8Br2 1Hc.87653210
4 (ppm)frequencyb.87653210
4 (ppm)frequencyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 577
578CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy51.Compound A,with molecular formula shows two signals in its NMR spectrum. Compound B,an isomer of compound
A,shows four signals,and in the proton-coupledmode,the signal farthest downfield is a doublet. Identify compounds A and B.
52.The NMR spectra of three isomers with molecular formula are shown here. Which isomer produces which spectrum?
87653210
487653210
4b.a.c.87653210
4 (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequencyC7H14O 1H 13CC4H9Cl,
BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 578
Problems57953.Would it be better to use NMR or NMR to distinguish among 1-butene,
cis-2-butene,and 2-methylpropene? Explain
your answer.
54.Determine the structure of each of the following unknown compounds based on its molecular formula and its IR and 
NMR spectra.2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)C6H12O2% Transmittance40002.5b.87653210
4 (ppm)frequency2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)C5H12Oa.% Transmittance2.54000 1H 13C 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 579
580CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
2400260028003000320034003600380087653210
4Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)C4H7ClO2% Transmittance40002.5c. (ppm)frequency87653210
4 (ppm)frequencyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 580
Problems58155.There are four esters with molecular formula How could they be distinguished by NMR?
56.An alkyl halide reacts with an alkoxide ion to form a compound whose NMR spectrum is shown here. Identify the alkyl halide
and the alkoxide ion. (
Hint:see Section 11.9.)4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency 1H 1HC4H8O2.2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
2400260028003000320034003600380087653210
4% Transmittance40002.5Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)C4H8O2Offset: 2.0 ppmd. (ppm)frequencyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 581
582CHAPTER 14NMR 
Spectroscopy57.Determine the structure of each of the following compounds based on its molecular formula and its NMR spectrum.
58.The NMR spectrum of 2-propen-1-ol is shown here. Indicate the protons in the molecule that give rise to each of the signals 
inthe spectrum.87653210
4 (ppm)frequency 1HC6H12Ob.C4H10Oa.200180160140120806040200
100 (ppm)frequency200180160140120806040200
100 (ppm)frequency 13CBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 582
Problems58359.How could the signals in the 6.5
Ð8.1-ppm region of their NMR spectra distinguish among the following compounds?
60.The NMR spectra of two compounds with molecular formula are shown here. Identify the compounds.
61.Draw a splitting diagram for the proton if and 
CCacbClHCH2ClH5.10H87653210
44876
9103210
5a.b. (ppm)frequency (ppm)frequencyC11H16 1HOCH3OCH3OCH3NO2NO2NO2 1HBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 583
62.Sketch the following spectra that would be obtained for 2-chloroethanol:
a.The NMR spectrum for a dry sample of the alcohol

b.The NMR spectrum for a sample of the alcohol that contains a trace amount of acid

c.The NMR spectrum

d.The proton-coupled NMR spectrum

e.The four parts of a DEPT NMR spectrum
63.How could NMR be used to prove that the addition of HBr to propene follows the rule that says that the electrophile adds to 
thesp2carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens.64.Identify each of the following compounds from its molecular formula and its NMR spectrum.
C6H12O87653210
4b.frequency(ppm)87653210
4C8H8a.frequency(ppm) 1H 1H 13C 13C 13C 1H 1H584CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 584
65.Dr. N. M. Arr was called in to help analyze the NMR spectrum of a mixture of compounds known to contain only C,H,and Br.
The mixture showed two singlets
Ñone at 1.8ppm and the other at 2.7ppm
Ñwith relative integrals of respectively. Dr. Arr
determined that the spectrum was that of a mixture of bromomethane and 2-bromo-2-methylpropane. What was the ratio of

bromomethane to 2-bromo-2-methylpropane in the mixture?66.Calculate the amount of energy (in calories) required to flip an nucleus in an NMR spectrometer that operates at 60MHz.
 1H1:6,
 1H4876
9103210
5C4H8Od. (ppm)frequency4876
9103210
5C9H18Oc. (ppm)frequencyProblems585BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 585
67.The following NMR spectra are for four compounds with molecular formula Identify the compounds.
4876
9103210
5c. (ppm)frequency4876
9103210
5b. (ppm)frequency4876
9103210
5a. (ppm)frequencyC6H12O2. 1H586CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 586
68.When compound A is treated with HBr,it forms compound B The NMR spectrum of compound A has
one singlet (1),two doublets (3,6),and two multiplets (both 1). (The relative areas of the signals are indicated in parentheses
.) TheNMR spectrum of compound B has a singlet (6),a triplet (3),and a quartet (2). Identify compounds A and B.
69.Determine the structure of each of the following compounds based on its molecular formula and its IR and NMR spectra.
87653210
4 (ppm)frequency2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)C6H12O% Transmittance2.54000a. 1H 1H 1H(C5H11Br).
(C5H12O)4876
9103210
5d. (ppm)frequencyProblems587BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:10 PM  Page 587
C10H13NO32.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
2400260028003000320034003600380040002.52.32.4
4200440046002.2Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittancec.87653210
4 (ppm)frequency2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance2.54000C6H14Ob.588CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:11 PM  Page 588
4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
2400260028003000320034003600380040002.52.32.4
4200440046002.2Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)NEAT% TransmittanceC11H14O2d.4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequencyProblems589BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:11 PM  Page 589
70.Identify the compound with molecular formula that gives the following NMR spectrum.
71.Determine the structure of each of the following compounds based on its mass,IR,and NMR spectra.
2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance2.54000020406080100120
114Relative abundancem/z43715827100500a. 1H2001751501257550250
100 (ppm)frequency 13CC3H5Cl3590CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:11 PM  Page 590
2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance2.5400020406080100120
154Relative abundance140160
m/z1057779100500b.87653210
4 (ppm)frequencyProblems591BRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:11 PM  Page 591
72.Identify the compound with molecular formula that is responsible for the following DEPT NMR spectrum.
73.Identify the compound with molecular formula that is responsible for the following NMR spectrum.
4876
9103210
5 1HC6H14ppmCH3 carbonsCH2 carbonsCH carbons
all protonated carbons40200
6010012080
140180200160
 13CC6H10O87653210
4 (ppm)frequency592CHAPTER 14NMR 
SpectroscopyBRUI14-526_592r3  27-03-2003  3:11 PM  Page 592
593The two chaptersin Part Five deal with
aromaticity and the reactions of aromatic
compounds. Aromaticity was first intro-

duced in Chapter7,where you saw that

benzene,a compound with an unusually

large resonance energy,is an aromatic

compound. We will now look at the crite-

ria that a compound must fulfill in order to

be classified as aromatic. Then we will ex-

amine the kinds of reactions that aromatic
compounds undergo. In Chapter21,we

will return to aromatic compounds when
we look at the reactions of aromatic com-

pounds in which one of the ring atoms is

an atom other than a carbon.In Chapter 15,we will examine the structural features
that cause a compound to be aromatic. We will also look

at the features that cause a compound to be antiaromatic.

Then we will take a look at the reactions that benzene un-

dergoes. You will see that although benzene,alkenes,and

dienes are all nucleophiles (because they all have car-

bonÐcarbon bonds),benzeneÕs aromaticity causes it to

undergo reactions that are quite different from the reac-

tions that alkenes and dienes undergo.
In Chapter 16,we will look at the reactions of substitut-
ed benzenes. First we will study reactions that change the

nature of the substituent on the benzene ring; and we will

see how the nature of the substituent affects both the re-

activity of the ring and the placement of any incoming

substituent. Then we will look at three types of reactions

that can be used to synthesize substituted benzenes other

than those discussed in Chapter15Ñreactions of arene

diazonium salts,nucleophilic aromatic substitution reac-

tions,and reactions that involve benzyne intermediates.

You will then have the opportunity to design syntheses of

compounds that contain benzene rings.pAromaticCompoundsPARTFIVE
Chapter 15Aromaticity ¥ Reactions ofBenzeneChapter 16Reactions of SubstitutedBenzenesBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 593
The compoundwe
know as benzene

was first isolat-
ed in 1825 by Michael
Faraday,who extracted

the compound from a liquid

residue obtained after heating
whale oil under pressure to produce a gas used to illuminate buildings in London.

Because of its origin,chemists suggested that it should be called ÒphenoÓfrom the

Greek word 
phainein(Òto shineÓ).In 1834,Eilhardt Mitscherlich correctly determined benzeneÕs molecular formula
and decided to call it benzin because of its relationship to benzoic acid,a
known substituted form of the compound. Later its name was changed to benzene.
Compounds like benzene,which have relatively few hydrogens in relation to the
number of carbons,are typically found in oils produced by trees and other plants.

Early chemists called such compounds 
aromatic
compoundsbecause of their pleasing
fragrances. In this way,they were distinguished from 
aliphaticcompounds,with high-
er hydrogen-to-carbon ratios,that were obtained from the chemical degradation of

fats. The chemical meaning of the word ÒaromaticÓnow signifies certain kinds of

chemical structures. We will now examine the criteria that a compound must satisfy to

be classified as aromatic.
15.1Criteria for Aromaticity
In Chapter7,we saw that benzene is a planar,cyclic compound with a cyclic cloud of
delocalized electrons above and below the plane of the ring (Figure15.1). Because its
electrons are delocalized,all the bonds have the same lengthÑpartway be-
tween the length of a typical single and a typical double bond. We also saw that ben-

zene is a particularly stable compound because it has an unusually large resonance

energy (or ). Most compounds with delocalized electrons
151 kJmol36 kcalmolCCp(C6H6)59415Aromaticity ¥ Reactions of BenzenePyrrole
BenzenePyridineEilhardt Mitscherlich (1794Ð1863)was born in Germany. He studied

oriental languages at the University

of Heidelberg and the Sorbonne,

where he concentrated on Farsi,

hoping that Napoleon would include
him in a delegation he intended to

send to Persia. That ambition ended

with NapoleonÕs defeat. Mitscherlich

returned to Germany to study

science,simultaneously receiving a

doctorate in Persian studies. He was

a professor of chemistry at the

University of Berlin.
Michael Faraday (1791Ð1867)
was born in England,a son of a

blacksmith. At the age of 14,he was

apprenticed to a bookbinder and

educated himself by reading the

books that he bound. He became an
assistant to Sir Humphry Davy in
1812 and taught himself chemistry. 

In 1825,he became the director of a

laboratory at the Royal Institution,

and,in 1833,he became a professor

of chemistry there. He is best known

for his work on electricity and
magnetism.
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 594
Section 15.2Aromatic Hydrocarbons
595Aromatic compounds are particularly
stable.For a compound to be aromatic, 
it must be cyclic and planar and have an
uninterrupted cloud of electrons. The
cloud must contain an odd number ofpairs of electrons.
PPPel (1896Ð1980)
was bornin Germany. He was a professor of

chemistry at the University of

Stuttgart and at the University of

Marburg.
have much smaller resonance energies. Compounds such as benzene with unusually
large resonance energies are called aromaticcompounds. How can we tell whether a

compound is aromatic by looking at its structure? In other words,what structural fea-

tures do aromatic compounds have in common?
To be classified as aromatic,a compound must meet both of the following criteria:
1.It must have an uninterrupted cyclic cloud ofelectrons
(often called a cloud) above and below the plane of the molecule.
LetÕs look a little more close-ly at what this means:For the cloud to be cyclic,
the molecule must be cyclic.For the cloud to be uninterrupted,
every atom in the ring must have a
porbital.For the cloud to form,each 
porbital must overlap with the 
porbitals oneither side of it. Therefore,
the molecule must be planar.2.The cloud must contain an odd number of pairs of electrons
.Benzene is an aromatic compound because it is cyclic and planar,every carbon in the
ring has a porbital,and the cloud contains 
three
pairs of electrons.
The German chemist Erich Hckel was the first to recognize that an aromatic com-
pound must have an odd number of pairs of electrons. In 1931,he described this

requirement by what has come to be known as 
elÕs rule
,or the 
rule. Therule states that for a planar,cyclic compound to be aromatic,its uninterrupted cloud

must contain electrons,where 
nis any whole number. According to H
ck-elÕs rule,then,an aromatic compound must have 
etc.,electrons. Because there are two electrons in a pair,
Hckel
Õs rule requires that an aromatic compound have 1,3,5,7,9,etc.,pairs of 
electrons. Thus,H
ckel
Õs rule is just a mathematical way of saying that an aromatic
compound must have an 
oddnumber of pairs of electrons.
PROBLEM 1a.What is the value of 
nin H
ckel
Õs rule when a compound has nine pairs of electrons?
b.Is such a compound aromatic?
15.2Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Monocyclic hydrocarbons with alternating single and double bonds are called
annulenes. A prefix in brackets denotes the number of carbons in the ring. Cyclobuta-
diene,benzene,and cyclooctatetraene are examples.
cyclobutadiene[4]-annulenebenzene[6]-annulenecyclooctatetraene[8]-annulenepppp18 4,14 3,10 2,6 1,2 0,42pp4n2ppppppppppa.b.c.
Figure 15.1
(a) Each carbon of benzene has a porbital. (b)The overlap of the 
porbitals forms a cloud of electrons

above and below the plane of the
benzene ring. (c)The electrostatic

potential map for benzene shows
that all the carbonÐcarbon bonds
have the same electron density.
p3-D Molecules:Cyclobutadiene;
Benzene;
CyclooctatetraeneBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 595
596CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneTutorial:
AromaticityWhen drawing resonance contributors,
remember that only electrons move,

atoms never move.3-D Molecules:Phenanthrene;
NaphthaleneCyclobutadienehas two pairs of electrons,and cyclooctatetraene has four pairs of 
electrons. Unlike benzene,these compounds are 
notaromatic because they have an
even
number of pairs of electrons. There is an additional reason why cycloocta-
tetraene is not aromaticÑit is not planar but,instead,tub-shaped. Earlier,we saw that,
for an eight-membered ring to be planar,it must have bond angles of 135
¡(Chapter2,
Problem28),and we know that carbons have 120
¡bond angles. Therefore,if cy-
clooctatetraene were planar,it would have considerable angle strain. Because cyclobu-

tadiene and cyclooctatetraene are not aromatic,they do not have the unusual stability

of aromatic compounds.Now let
Õs look at some other compounds and determine whether they are aromatic.
Cyclopropene is not aromatic because it does not have an uninterrupted ring of 
por-bital-bearing atoms. One of its ring atoms is hybridized,and only and 
sphy-bridized carbons have 
porbitals. Therefore,cyclopropene does not fulfill the first
criterion for aromaticity.
The cyclopropenylcation is aromatic because it has an uninterrupted ring of 
porbital-bearing atoms and the cloud contains 
one(an odd number) pair of delocal-
ized electrons. The cyclopropenyl anion is not aromatic because although it has an

uninterrupted ring of porbital-bearing atoms,its cloud has 
two(an even number)
pairs of electrons.
Cycloheptatriene is not aromatic. Although it has the correct number of pairs of 
electrons (three) to be aromatic,it does not have an uninterrupted ring of 
porbital-bearing atoms because one of the ring atoms is hybridized. Cyclopentadiene is

also not aromatic:It has an even number of pairs of electrons (two pairs),
andit doesnot have an uninterrupted ring of 
porbital-bearing atoms. Like cycloheptatriene,
cyclopentadiene has an hybridized carbon.
The criteria for determining whether a monocyclic hydrocarbon compound is aro-
matic can also be used to determine whether a polycyclic hydrocarbon compound is

aromatic. Naphthalene (five pairs of electrons),phenanthrene (seven pairs of elec-

trons),and chrysene (nine pairs of electrons) are aromatic.
naphthalenephenanthrenechrysene
pppcycloheptatrienecyclopentadiene
sp3sp3sp3psp3presonance contributors of the cyclopropenyl cationresonance hybrid
ppppcyclopropenecyclopropenyl
cationcyclopropenylanionsp2sp3sp2pppBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 596
Section 15.2Aromatic Hydrocarbons
597Robert F. Curl, Jr.,
was born inTexas in 1933. He received a B.A.

from Rice University and a Ph.D.

from the University of California,

Berkeley. He is a professor of

chemistry at Rice University.
Sir Harold W. Kroto
was born in1939 in England and is a professor of

chemistry at the University of Sussex.
BUCKYBALLS AND AIDSIn addition to diamond and graphite (Section1.1),

a third form of pure carbon was discovered while
scientists were conducting experiments designed to understand

how long-chain molecules are formed in outer space. R. E. Smal-

ley,R. F. Curl,Jr.,and H. W. Kroto,the discoverers of this new

form of carbon,shared the 1996 Nobel Prize in chemistry for

their discovery. They named this new form buckminsterfullerene

(often shortened to fullerene) because it reminded them of the ge-

odesic domes popularized by R. Buckminster Fuller,an Ameri-

can architect and philosopher. The substance is nicknamed

Òbuckyball.
ÓConsisting of a hollow cluster of 60 carbons,
fullerene is the most symmetrical large molecule known. Like

graphite,fullerene has only hybridized carbons,but instead

of being arranged in layers,the carbons are arranged in rings,

forming a hollow cluster of 60 carbons that fit together like the

seams of a soccer ball. Each molecule has 32 interlocking rings

(20 hexagons and 12 pentagons). At first glance,fullerene would

appear to be aromatic because of its benzene-like rings. Howev-

er,it does not undergo electrophilic substitution reactions; in-

stead,it undergoes electrophilic addition reactions like an alkene.

FullereneÕs lack of aromaticity is apparently caused by the curva-
ture of the ball,which prevents the molecule from fulfilling the

first criterion for aromaticity
Ñthat it must be planar.
Buckyballs have extraordinary chemical and physical proper-
ties. They are exceedingly rugged and are capable of surviving the

extreme temperatures of outer space. Because they are essentially

hollow cages,they can be manipulated to make materials never

before known. For example,when a buckyball is 
ÒdopedÓby in-
serting potassium or cesium into its cavity,it becomes an excellent
sp2organic superconductor. These molecules are presently being
studied for use in many other applications,such as new polymers

and catalysts and new drug delivery systems. The discovery of

buckyballs is a strong reminder of the technological advances that

can be achieved as a result of conducting basic research.
Scientists have even turned their attention to buckyballs in
their quest for a cure for AIDS. An enzyme that is required 

for HIV to reproduce exhibits a nonpolar pocket in its three-

dimensional structure. If this pocket is blocked,the production of

the virus ceases. Because buckyballs are nonpolar and have ap-

proximately the same diameter as the pocket of the enzyme,they

are being considered as possible blockers. The first step in pursu-

ing this possibility was to equip the buckyball with polar side

chains to make it water soluble so that it could flow through the

bloodstream. Scientists have now modified the side chains so that

they bind to the enzyme. It
Õs still a long way from a cure for
AIDS,but this represents one example of the many and varied ap-

proaches that scientists are taking to find a cure for this disease.
C60buckminsterfullerene"buckyball"3-D Molecules:1-Chloronaphthalene; 
2-ChloronaphthaleneRichard E. Smalleywas born in1943 in Akron,Ohio. He received a

B.S. from the University of Michigan

and a Ph.D. from Princeton

University. He is a professor of

chemistry at Rice University.
PROBLEM 2Whichof the followingcompounds are aromatic?
a.e.
b.f.
c.cycloheptatrienyl cationg.cyclononatetraenyl anion
d.h.
PROBLEM 3SOLVED
a.Howmany monobromonaphthalenes are there?
b.How many monobromophenanthrenes are there?
SOLUTION TO 3a
There are two monobromonaphthalenes. Substitution cannot occur
at either of the carbons shared by both rings,because those carbons are not bonded to a

hydrogen. Naphthalene is a flat molecule,so substitution for a hydrogen at any other

carbon will result in one of the compounds shown.
BrBrCH2CHCHCHCHCH2A geodesic domeBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 597
benzenepyridinepyrrole598CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzenePROBLEM 4The [10]- and [12]-annulenes have been synthesized,and neither has been found to be aro-
matic. Explain.15.3Aromatic Heterocyclic Compounds
A compound does not have to be a hydrocarbon to be aromatic. Many 
heterocyclic
compoundsare aromatic. A 
heterocyclic compound
is a cyclic compound in which
one or more of the ring atoms is an atom other than carbon. A ring atom that is not car-

bon is called a 
heteroatom
. The name comes from the Greek word 
heteros
,which
means Òdifferent.
ÓThe most common heteroatoms found in heterocyclic compounds
are N,O,and S.
Pyridine is an aromatic heterocyclic compound. Each of the six ring atoms of pyridine
is hybridized,which means that each has a 
porbital; and the molecule contains threepairs of electrons. Don
Õt be confused by the lone-pair electrons on the nitrogen; they
are not electrons. Because nitrogen is hybridized,it has three orbitals and a 
porbital. The porbital is used to form the bond. Two of nitrogen
Õs orbitals overlap
the orbitals of adjacent carbon atoms,and nitrogen
Õs third orbital contains the
lone pair.
It is not immediately apparent that the electrons represented as lone-pair electronson the nitrogen atom of pyrrole are electrons. The resonance contributors,however,

show that the nitrogen atom is hybridized and uses its three orbitals to bond to

two carbons and one hydrogen. The lone-pair electrons are in a 
porbital that overlaps
the porbitals on adjacent carbons,forming a bond
Ñthus,they are electrons. Pyr-
role,therefore,has three pairs of electrons and is aromatic.
NHNHN
HN
HN
Hresonance contributors of pyrrolepppsp2sp2pthis is a p orbitalNorbital structure of pyridinetheseelectrons are
in an sp2 orbitalperpendicular
to the p orbitalssp2sp2sp2psp2sp2ppsp2Nheterocyclic compoundspyrroleHpyridineNfuranOthiopheneSBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 598
Section 15.4Some Chemical Consequences of Aromaticity
599Similarly,furan and thiophene are stable aromatic compounds. Both the oxygen in
the former and the sulfur in the latter are hybridized and have one lone pair in an
orbital. The second lone pair is in a 
porbital that overlaps the 
porbitals of adjacentcarbons,forming a bond. Thus,they are electrons.
Quinoline,indole,imidazole,purine,and pyrimidine are other examples of hetero-
cyclic aromatic compounds. The heterocyclic compounds discussed in this section are

examined in greater detail in Chapter21.
PROBLEM 5In what orbitals are the electrons represented as lone pairs when drawing the structures of
quinoline,indole,imidazole,purine,and pyrimidine?
PROBLEM 6Answer the following questions by examining the electrostatic potential maps on p.598:
a.Why is the bottom part of the electrostatic potential map of pyrrole blue?
b.Why is the bottom part of the electrostatic potential map of pyridine red?

c.Why is the center of the electrostatic potential map of benzene more red than the
center of the electrostatic potential map of pyridine?
15.4Some Chemical Consequences of Aromaticity
The of cyclopentadiene is 15,which is extraordinarily acidic for a hydrogen that
is bonded to an hybridized carbon. Ethane,for example,has a of 50.
CH3CH3HHHCH3CH2HHcyclopentadieneethaneethyl anion
cyclopentadienylanionpKa  50pKa  15pasp3paNNN
quinolineindoleimidazolepurinepyrimidine
NHNHNNNNNHresonance contributors of furanOOOOO

ppsp2sp2NHOorbital structure of pyrroletheseelectrons
are in a 
p orbitaltheseelectrons
are in a 
p orbitalorbital structure of furantheseelectrons are
in an sp2 orbitalperpendicular
to the p orbitalsBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 599
600CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneWhyis the of cyclopentadiene so much lower than that of ethane? To answer
this question,we must look at the stabilities of the anions that are formed when the

compounds lose a proton. (Recall that the strength of an acid is determined by the sta-

bility of its conjugate base:The more stable its conjugate base,the stronger is the acid;

see Section1.18.) All the electrons in the ethyl anion are localized. In contrast,the

anion that is formed when cyclopentadiene loses a proton fulfills the requirements for

aromaticity:It is cyclic and planar,each atom in the ring has a 
porbital,and the 
cloud has three pairs of delocalized electrons. The negatively charged carbon in the

cyclopentadienyl anion is hybridized because if it were hybridized,the ion

would not be aromatic. The resonance hybrid shows that all the carbons in the cy-

clopentadienyl anion are equivalent. Each carbon has exactly one-fifth of the negative

charge associated with the anion.
As a result of its aromaticity,the cyclopentadienyl anion is an unusually stable
carbanion. This is why cyclopentadiene has an unusually low In other words,it is

the stability conveyed by the aromaticity of the cyclopentadienyl anion that makes the

hydrogen much more acidic than hydrogens bonded to other carbons.
PROBLEM 7Predict the relative values of cyclopentadiene and cycloheptatriene.
PROBLEM 8a.Draw arrows to show the movement of electrons in going from one resonance contribu-
tor to the next in
1.the cyclopentadienyl anion

2.pyrrole
b.How many ring atoms share the negative charge in
1.the cyclopentadienyl anion?

2.pyrrole?
Another example of the influence of aromaticity on chemical reactivity is the un-
usual chemical behavior exhibited by cycloheptatrienyl bromide. Recall from

Section2.9that alkyl halides tend to be relatively nonpolar covalent compounds
Ñthey are soluble in nonpolar solvents and insoluble in water. Cycloheptatrienyl bro-

mide,however,is an alkyl halide that behaves like an ionic compound
Ñit is insoluble
in nonpolar solvents,but readily soluble in water.
covalentcycloheptatrienyl bromideBrioniccycloheptatrienyl bromidetropylium bromideBrpasp3pa.resonance contributors of the cyclopentadienyl anionresonance hybridsp3sp2pppaTutorial:
Aromaticity and acidityBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 600
Cycloheptatrienyl bromide is an ionic compound because its cation is aromatic.
The alkyl halide is 
notaromatic in the covalent form because it has an hybridized
carbon,so it does 
nothave an uninterrupted ring of 
porbital-bearing atoms. In the
ionic form,however,the cycloheptatrienyl cation (also known as the tropylium cation)

isaromatic because it is a planar cyclic ion,all the ring atoms are hybridized
(which means that each ring atom has a 
porbital),and it has three pairs of delocalized
electrons. The stability associated with the aromatic cation causes the alkyl halide to
exist in the ionic form.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Which of the following compounds has the greater dipole moment?
Before attempting to answer this kind of question,make sure that you know exactly what the
question is asking. You know that the dipole moment of these compounds results from the un-

equal sharing of electrons by carbon and oxygen. Therefore,the more unequal the sharing,the

greater is the dipole moment. So now the question becomes,which compound has a greater

negative charge on its oxygen atom? Draw the structures with separated charges,and deter-

mine their relative stabilities. In the case of the compound on the left,the three-membered

ring becomes aromatic when the charges are separated. In the case of the compound on the

right,the structure with separated charges is not aromatic. Because being aromatic makes a

compound more stable,the compound on the left has the greater dipole moment.
PROBLEM 9Draw the resonance contributors of the cyclooctatrienyl dianion.
a.Which of the resonance contributors is the least stable?
b.Which of the resonance contributors makes the smallest contribution to the hybrid?
COCOCOCOpsp2sp3Section 15.4Some Chemical Consequences of Aromaticity
601resonance contributors of the cycloheptatrienyl cationresonance hybridBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 601
602CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of Benzene15.5Antiaromaticity
An aromatic compound is 
more stable
than an analogous cyclic compound with local-
ized electrons. In contrast,an 
antiaromatic
compound is less stablethan an analogouscyclic compound with localized electrons. 
Aromaticity is characterized by stability,
whereas antiaromaticity is characterized by instability
.A compound is classified as being antiaromatic if it fulfills the first criterion for
aromaticity but does not fulfill the second criterion. In other words,it must be a planar,

cyclic compound with an uninterrupted ring of 
porbital-bearing atoms,and the 
cloud must contain an 
even
number of pairs of electrons. H
ckel would state that the
cloud must contain 4
nelectrons,where 
nis any whole number
Ña mathematicalway of saying that the cloud must contain an 
even
number of pairs of electrons.
Cyclobutadiene is a planar,cyclic molecule with two pairs of electrons. Hence,it is
expected to be antiaromatic and highly unstable. In fact,it is too unstable to be isolated,

although it has been trapped at very cold temperatures. The cyclopentadienyl cation also

has two pairs of electrons,so we can conclude that it is antiaromatic and unstable.
PROBLEM 10a.Predict the relative values of cyclopropene and cyclopropane.
b.Which is more soluble in water,3-bromocyclopropene or bromocyclopropane?
PROBLEM 11Which of the compounds in Problem2 are antiaromatic?
15.6A Molecular Orbital Description of Aromaticity and Antiaromaticity
Why are planar molecules with uninterrupted cyclic electron clouds highly stable
(aromatic) if they have an odd number of pairs of electrons and highly unstable (anti-

aromatic) if they have an even number of pairs of electrons? To answer this question,

we must turn to molecular orbital theory.
The relative energies of the molecular orbitals of a planar molecule with an unin-
terrupted cyclic electron cloud can be determined
Ñwithout having to use any
mathÑby first drawing the cyclic compound with one of its vertices pointed down.
The relative energies of the molecular orbitals correspond to the relative levels of

the vertices (Figure15.2). Molecular orbitals below the midpoint of the cyclic struc-

ture are bonding molecular orbitals,those above the midpoint are antibonding molec-

ular orbitals,and any at the midpoint are nonbonding molecular orbitals. This scheme

is sometimes called a Frost device (or a Frost circle) in honor of Arthur A. Frost,an
pppppppacyclopentadienylcationcyclobutadienepppppppincreasing stabilityaromatic compound  cyclic compound with localized electrons  antiaromatic compoundrelative stabilitiesAntiaromatic compounds 
are highly unstable.
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 602
Section 15.6A Molecular Orbital Description of Aromaticity and Antiaromaticity
603EnergyEnergynonbondingMOsa.b.d.
c.antibondingMOsantibondingMOsbonding MOsbonding MOsbonding MObonding MOsantibondingMOsantibondingMOFigure 15.2
The distribution of electrons in the molecular orbitals of (a)benzene, (b)the
cyclopentadienyl anion, (c)the cyclopentadienyl cation, and (d)cyclobutadiene. The

relative energies of the molecular orbitals in a cyclic compound correspond to the

relative levels of the vertices. Molecular orbitals below the midpoint of the cyclic structure
are bonding, those above the midpoint are antibonding, and those at the midpoint are
nonbonding.ppTutorial:
Molecular orbital description
of aromaticityAmerican scientist who devised this simple method. Notice that the number of 
molecular orbitals is the same as the number of atoms in the ring because each ring
atom contributes a 
porbital. (Recall that orbitals are conserved; Section 7.11.)
Thesix electrons of benzene occupy its three bonding molecular orbitals,and
the six electrons of the cyclopentadienyl anion occupy 
itsthree bonding molecu-
lar orbitals. Notice that there is always an odd number of bonding orbitals because one

corresponds to the lowest vertex and the others come in degenerate pairs. This means

that aromatic compounds
Ñsuch as benzene and the cyclopentadienyl anion
Ñwith an
odd number of pairs of electrons have completely filled bonding orbitals and no

electrons in either nonbonding or antibonding orbitals. This is what gives aromatic

molecules their stability. (A more in-depth description of the molecular orbitals in

benzene is given in Section7.11.)
Antiaromatic compounds have an even number of pairs of electrons. Therefore,
either they are unable to fill their bonding orbitals (cylopentadienyl cation) or they have

a pair of electrons left over after the bonding orbitals are filled (cyclobutadiene).

HundÕs rule requires that these two electrons go into two degenerate orbitals (Section
1.2). The unpaired electrons are responsible for the instability of antiaromatic molecules.
PROBLEM 12How many bonding,nonbonding,and antibonding molecular orbitals does cyclobuta-
diene have? In which molecular orbitals are the electrons?
PROBLEM 13Can a radical be aromatic?PROBLEM 14Following the instructions for drawing the molecular orbital energy levels of the com-

pounds shown in Figure15.2,draw the molecular orbital energy levels for the cyclohep-

tatrienyl cation,the cycloheptatrienyl anion,and the cyclopropenyl cation. For each

compound,show the distribution of the electrons. Which of the compounds are aro-

matic? Which are antiaromatic?
pppppppppppppAromatic compounds are stable 
because they have filled bonding molecular orbitals.PBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 603
604CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of Benzene15.7Nomenclature of Monosubstituted Benzenes
Some monosubstituted benzenes are named simply by stating the name of the sub-
stituent,followed by the word 
Òbenzene.ÓSome monosubstituted benzenes have names that incorporate the name of the sub-
stituent. Unfortunately,such names have to be memorized.
With the exception of toluene,benzene rings with an alkyl substituent are named as
alkyl-substituted benzenes or as phenyl-substituted alkanes.
When a benzene ring is a substituent,it is called a 
phenyl group
. A benzene ring with
a methylene group is called a 
benzyl group
. The phenyl group gets its name from
Òpheno,Óthe name that was rejected for benzene (Section15.0).
chloromethylbenzenebenzyl chlorideCH2Cla phenyl groupa benzyl group
CH2Odibenzyl etherdiphenyl etherCH2OCH2tolueneaniline
phenolbenzenesulfonic acid
CH3OHNH
2SO3Hbromobenzenechlorobenzenenitrobenzene
used as a solventin shoe polishethylbenzeneBrClNO
2CH2CH3OHOCanisolebenzaldehyde
HOstyrenebenzoic acidbenzonitrile
CNCCHOCH3CH2isopropylbenzenecumeneCH3CHCH3sec-butylbenzeneCH3CHCH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH3tert-butylbenzeneCH3CCH3CH32-phenylpentane3-phenylpentane
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 604
Section 15.8How Benzene Reacts
605THE TOXICITY OF BENZENEAlthough benzene has been widely used in chem-
ical synthesis and has been frequently used as asolvent,it is toxic. Its major toxic effect is on the central ner-

vous system and on bone marrow. Chronic exposure to benzene

causes leukemia and aplastic anemia. A higher-than-average

incidence of leukemia has been found in industrial workers
with long-term exposure to as little as 1ppm benzene in the at-
mosphere. Toluene has replaced benzene as a solvent because,

although it is a central nervous system depressant like benzene,

it does not cause leukemia or aplastic anemia. 
ÒGlue sniffers
Óseek the narcotic central nervous system effects of solvents

such as toluene. This can be a highly dangerous activity.
An aryl group (Ar) is the general term for either a phenyl group or a substituted
phenyl group,just as an alkyl group (R) is the general term for a group derived from an

alkane. In other words,ArOH could be used to designate any of the following phenols:
OHOH
BrOHOH
OCH3CH2CH3PROBLEM 15Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.2-phenylhexanec.3-benzylpentane
b.benzyl alcohold.bromomethylbenzene
15.8How Benzene ReactsAs a consequence of the electrons above and below the plane of its ring,benzene is
a nucleophile. It will,therefore,react with an electrophile When an electrophile

attaches itself to a benzene ring,a carbocation intermediate is formed.
This should remind you of the first step in an electrophilic addition reaction of an
alkene:A nucleophilic alkene reacts with an electrophile,thereby forming a carboca-

tion intermediate (Section3.6). In the second step of an electrophilic addition reaction,

the carbocation reacts with a nucleophile to form an addition product.
YCHRRCHcarbocationintermediateproduct of electrophilicadditionYCHRZRCHYCHRRCHZZYYHcarbocationintermediateY.pBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 605
The reaction coordinate diagram in Figure15.4shows that the reaction of 
benzeneto form a 
substituted benzenehas a close to zero. The reaction of 
benzeneto formthe much less stable nonaromatic addition product
would have been a highly ender-
gonic reaction. Consequently,benzene undergoes 
electrophilic substitution reactions
that preserve aromaticity,rather than 
electrophilic addition reactions
(the reactionscharacteristic of alkenes),which would destroy aromaticity.
G¡606CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneYYZYHbbaaZcarbocationintermediatea nonaromaticcompoundproduct ofelectrophilic additionYan aromaticcompoundproduct ofelectrophilic substitutionHZFigure 15.3
Reaction of benzene with anelectrophile. Because the aromatic
product is more stable, the reaction
proceeds as (a)an electrophilic

substitution reaction rather than
(b)an electrophilic addition

reaction.Progress of the reactionFree energyZHYaddition productsubstitution productYYZHZYZFigure 15.4
Reaction coordinate diagrams forelectrophilic substitution of
benzene and electrophilic 
addition to benzene.If the carbocation intermediate formed from the reaction of benzene with an elec-
trophile were to react similarly with a nucleophile (depicted as event 
bin Figure15.3),
the addition product would not be aromatic. If,however,the carbocation loses a proton

from the site of electrophilic attack (depicted as event 
ain Figure15.3),the aromati-
city of the benzene ring is restored. Because the aromatic product is much more stable

than the nonaromatic addition product,the overall reaction is an electrophilic substitu-

tion reaction rather than an electrophilic addition reaction. In the substitution reaction,
an electrophile substitutes for one of the hydrogens attached to the benzene ring.PROBLEM 16If electrophilic addition to benzene is an endergonic reaction overall,how can electrophilic
addition to an alkene be an exergonic reaction overall?
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 606
Section 15.9General Mechanism for Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution Reactions
607In an electrophilic aromatic substitution
reaction, an electrophile is put on

aring carbon, and the comes off the

same ring carbon.H(Y)15.9General Mechanism for Electrophilic
Aromatic Substitution Reactions
Because electrophilic substitution of benzene involves the reaction of an electrophile
with an aromatic compound,it is more precisely called an electrophilic aromatic sub-

stitution reaction. In an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction
,an electrophile
substitutes for a hydrogen of an aromatic compound.The following are the five most common electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions:
1.Halogenation:A bromine (Br),a chlorine (Cl),or an iodine (I) substitutes for a
hydrogen.2.Nitration:A nitro group substitutes for a hydrogen.
3.Sulfonation
:A sulfonic acid group substitutes for a hydrogen.
4.FriedelÐCrafts acylation:An acyl group substitutes for a hydrogen.
5.FriedelÐCrafts alkylation
:an alkyl (R) group substitutes for a hydrogen.
All of these electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions take place by the same
two-step mechanism. In the first step,benzene reacts with an electrophile form-

ing a carbocation intermediate. The structure of the carbocation intermediate can be

approximated by three resonance contributors. In the second step of the reaction,a

base in the reaction mixture pulls off a proton from the carbocation intermediate,and

the electrons that held the proton move into the ring to reestablish its aromaticity. No-

tice that the proton is always removed from the carbon that has formed the new bond
with the electrophile
.The firststep is relatively slow and endergonic because an aromatic compound is
being converted into a much less stable nonaromatic intermediate (Figure15.4). The

second step is fast and strongly exergonic because this step restores the stability-

enhancing aromaticity.
We will look at each of these five electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions indi-
vidually. As you study them,notice that they differ only in how the electrophile 

needed to start the reaction is generated. Once the electrophile is formed,all five reac-

tions follow the same two-step mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitution.
PROBLEM 17Which compound will undergo an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction more rapid-
ly,benzene or hexadeuteriobenzene?
orHHHHHHDDDDDDYY,(RCO)(SO3H)(NO2)YHYHan electrophilic aromatic substitution reactionTutorial:
Electrophilic aromatic
substitutionslowfast
general mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitutionYHBYHYHYHYBBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 607
608CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of Benzene15.10Halogenation of BenzeneThe bromination or chlorination of benzene requires a Lewis acid such as ferric bro-
mide or ferric chloride. Recall that a 
Lewis acid
is a compound that accepts a share in
a pair of electrons (Section1.21).
In the first step of the bromination reaction,bromine donates a lone pair to the Lewis
acid. This weakens the BrBr bond,thereby providing the electrophile necessary for

electrophilic aromatic substitution.To make the mechanisms easier to understand,only one of the three resonance con-
tributors of the carbocation intermediate is shown in this and subsequent illustrations.

Bear in mind,however,that each carbocation intermediate actually has the three reso-

nance contributors shown in Section15.9. In the last step of the reaction,a base 

from the reaction mixture removes a proton from the carbocation intermediate. The

following equation shows that the catalyst is regenerated:
Chlorination of benzene occurs by the same mechanism as bromination.Ferric bromide and ferric chloride react readily with moisture in the air during han-
dling,which inactivates them as catalysts. Therefore,instead of using the actual salt,

ferric bromide or ferric chloride is generated in situ (in the reaction mixture) by adding

iron filings and bromine or chlorine to the reaction mixture. Therefore,the halogen in

the Lewis acid is the same as the reagent halogen.
ClHBFeCl4BHClClClFeCl
3ClClFeCl
3ClClFeCl
3mechanism for chlorinationHBHBrFeBr4FeBr3B(B)BrHBFeBr4BHBrBrBrFeBr
3BrBrFeBr
3BrBrFeBr
3mechanism for brominationClClHClFeCl3chlorinationchlorobenzene
BrBrHBrFeBr3brominationbromobenzene
Movie:Bromination
of benzeneBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 608
Section 15.11Nitration of Benzene
609THYROXINEThyroxine is a hormone that regulates the meta-
bolic rate,causing an increase in the rate at which
fats,carbohydrates,and proteins are metabolized. Humans ob-

tain thyroxine from tyrosine (an amino acid) and iodine. We get

iodine primarily from the iodized salt in our diet. An enzyme
Unlike the reaction of benzene with or the reaction of an alkene with 
or does not require a Lewis acid (Section4.7). An alkene is more reactive than

benzene because an alkene has a smaller activation energy,since carbocation forma-

tion is not accompanied by a loss of aromaticity. As a result,the or 

bond does not have to be weakened to form a better electrophile.
PROBLEM 18Why does hydration inactivate 
Electrophilic iodine is obtained by treating with an oxidizing agent such as
nitric acid.Once the electrophile is formed,iodination of benzene occurs by the same mechanism
as bromination and chlorination.IHImechanism for iodinationIBHBI2 IiodinationIIHiodobenzeneoxidizing agentI2IFeBr3 ?ClClBrBrCl2Br2Cl2,Br23 Br22 FeBr32 Fe3 Cl22 FeCl32 Fe15.11Nitration of BenzeneNitration of benzene with nitric acid requires sulfuric acid as a catalyst.NO2HNOH2OH2SO4nitrationnitrobenzene
called iodoperoxidase converts the we ingest to the elec-
trophile needed to place an iodo substituent on the benzene ring.

Low thyroxine levels can be corrected by hormone supplements.

Chronically low levels of thyroxine cause enlargement of the

thyroid gland,a condition known as goiter.
I,ItyrosinethyroxineCH2CHCONH3OHOHO
IIIICH2CHCONH3OOBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 609
nitric acidNOHOO
nitronium ion
OON610CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneTo generate the necessary electrophile,sulfuric acid protonates nitric acid. Loss of
water from protonated nitric acid forms a nitronium ion,the electrophile required for

nitration. Remember that any base present in the reaction mixture (

solvent) can remove the proton in the second step of the aromatic substitution reaction.
15.12Sulfonation of BenzeneFuming sulfuric acid (a solution of in sulfuric acid) or concentrated sulfuric acid
is used to sulfonate aromatic rings.As the following mechanism shows,a substantial amount of electrophilic sulfur triox-
ide is generated when concentrated sulfuric acid is heated,as a result of the
electrophile losing a proton. Take a minute to note the similarities in the mech-
anisms for forming the electrophile for sulfonation and the electrophile

for nitration.A sulfonic acid is a strong acid because of the three electron-withdrawing oxygen
atoms and the stability of its conjugate baseÑthe electrons left behind when a protonis lost are shared by three oxygen atoms (Section1.19).
SO3HHBSO3Hmechanism for sulfonationHOS
sulfuric acidOHOOHOSOH
OOHOS
H2OH3OSO3OOOSOH
OOHOHSOH
OOHSO3HBNO2SO3HSO3H(SO3)SO3HHSOH2Osulfonationbenzenesulfonic acidSO3NO2HNO2mechanism for nitrationNO2nitronium ionnitric acid:BHBHONO
2HOSO
3HHONO
2HNO2H2OHSO4H2O, HSO4 ,(B)BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 610
Section 15.12Sulfonation of Benzene
611Sulfonation of benzene is a reversible reaction. If benzenesulfonic acid is heated in
dilute acid,the reaction proceeds in the reverse direction.
The principle of microscopic reversibility
applies to all reactions. It states that themechanism of a reaction in the reverse direction must retrace each step of the mecha-

nism in the forward direction in microscopic detail. This means that the forward and

reverse reactions must have the same intermediates and that the rate-determining 
Òen-ergy hill
Ómust be the same in both directions. For example,sulfonation is described
by the reaction coordinate diagram in Figure15.5,going from left to right. Therefore,

desulfonation is described by the same reaction coordinate diagram going from right

to left. In sulfonation,the rate-determining step is nucleophilic attack of benzene on

the ion. In desulfonation,the rate-limiting step is loss of the ion from

the benzene ring. An example of the usefulness of desulfonation to synthetic chemists

is given in Chapter16,Problem19.
SO3HSO3HHSO3Hmechanism for desulfonationHSO3HSO3HSO3HSO3HH3O100 C/benzenesulfonic acidSOH
OObenzenesulfonate ionSOOpKa = 0.60OHHSO3HFree energyProgress of the reactionSO3H HSO3Htransition state for the rate-determining stepin the forward direction and for the
rate-determining step in the reverse directionFigure 15.5
Reaction coordinate diagram forthe sulfonation of benzene (left to
right) and the desulfonation of
benzenesulfonic acid (right to left).PROBLEM 19The reaction coordinate diagram in Figure15.5shows that the rate-determining step for sul-
fonation is the slower of the two steps,whereas the rate-determining step for desulfonation is

the faster of the two steps. Explain how the faster step can be the rate-determining step.
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 611
James Mason Crafts (1839
Ð1917)was born in Boston,the son a of

woolen-goods manufacturer. He

graduated from Harvard in 1858 

and was a professor of chemistry at

Cornell University and the Massa-

chusetts Institute of Technology. He

was president of MIT from 1897 to

1900,when he was forced to retire

because of chronic poor health.
Charles Friedel (1832Ð1899)wasborn in Strasbourg,France. He was a

professor of chemistry and director of

research at the Sorbonne. At one

point,his interest in mineralogy led

him to attempt to make synthetic

diamonds. He met James Crafts when

they both were doing research at

LÕEcole de M”dicine in Paris. 
They collaborated scientifically for

most of their lives,discovering the

Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions in Friedel
Õslaboratory in 1877.
612CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of Benzene15.13FriedelÐCrafts Acylation of BenzeneTwo electrophilic substitution reactions bear the names of chemists Charles Friedel
and James Crafts. Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation
places an acyl group on a benzene ring,
and Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation
places an alkyl group on a benzene ring.
Either an acyl halide or an acid anhydride can be used for Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation.
An acylium ion is the electrophile required for a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction.
This ion is formed by the reaction of an acyl chloride or an acid anhydride with 

a Lewis acid.
Because the product of a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction contains a carbonyl
group that can complex with Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reactions must be carried
out with more than one equivalent of When the reaction is over,water is added

to the reaction mixture to liberate the product from the complex.
PROBLEM 20Show the mechanism for the generation of the acylium ion if an acid anhydride is used in-
stead of an acyl chloride in a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction.
AlCl3.AlCl3,mechanism for FriedelÐCrafts acylationOCAlCl
3AlCl4ClRCCOBOHRCORRHBCORCORan acylium ionAlCl3,HCl1. AlCl32. H2OFriedelÐCrafts acylationOCRRan acyl chloride1. AlCl32. H2OOCan acid anhydrideOCOOCRROCClROCOHROCan acyl groupRan alkyl groupROCRRR
AlClAl(OH)3 HCl3 H2OOCOCAlClBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 612
PROBLEM 21Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
The synthesis of benzaldehyde from benzene poses a problem because formyl chlo-
ride,the acyl halide required for the reaction,is unstable and cannot be purchased.

Formyl chloride can be prepared,however,by means of the 
GattermanÐKoch
formyla-tion reaction
. This reaction uses a high-pressure mixture of carbon monoxide and HCl
to generate formyl chloride,along with an aluminum chloride
Ðcuprous chloride cata-
lyst to carry out the acylation reaction.
15.14FriedelÐCrafts Alkylation of BenzeneThe FriedelÐCrafts alkylation reaction substitutes an alkyl group for a hydrogen.
In the first step of the reaction,a carbocation is formed from the reaction of an alkyl
halide with Alkyl fluorides,alkyl chlorides,alkyl bromides,and alkyl iodides

can all be used. Vinyl halides and aryl halides cannot be used because their carbocations

are too unstable to be formed (Section10.8).
In Section16.3,we will see that an alkyl-substituted benzene is more reactive than
benzene. Therefore,to prevent further alkylation of the alkyl-substituted benzene,a

large excess of benzene is used in Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation reactions. This approach
ensures that the electrophile is more likely to encounter a molecule of benzene than a

molecule of alkyl-substituted benzene.
Recall that a carbocation will rearrange if rearrangement leads to a more stable car-
bocation (Section4.6). When the carbocation can rearrange in a Friedel
ÐCrafts alkyla-
tion reaction,the major product will be the product with the rearranged alkyl group on
RRHBmechanism for FriedelÐCrafts alkylationAlCl4ClAlCl
3RRBHRAlCl3.HClFriedelÐCrafts alkylationRRClAlCl3high pressurebenzaldehydeAlCl3/CuClformyl chlorideunstableCOCHCl
OHClCOHAlCl3OClOSection 15.14Friedel
ÐCrafts Alkylation of Benzene613BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 613
614CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneINCIPIENT PRIMARY
CARBOCATIONS
For simplicity,we have shown the formation of a
primary carbocation in the two preceding reactions. However,as

we saw in Section10.5,primary carbocations are too unstable to

be formed in solution. The fact is that a true primary carbocation

is never formed in a Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation reaction. Instead,
the carbocation remains complexed with the Lewis acid
Ñit iscalled an ÒincipientÓcarbocation. A carbocation rearrangement
occurs because the incipient carbocation has sufficient carbo-

cation character to permit the rearrangement.CH3CHCH3CH3CHCH2HCH3CH2CH2ClAlCl
3AlCl3Cl1,2-hydrideshiftincipient primary carbocationClAlCl3the benzene ring. The relative amounts of rearranged and unrearranged product
depend on the increase in carbocation stability achieved as a result of the rearrange-

ment. For example,when benzene reacts with 1-chlorobutane,a primary carbocation

rearranges to a secondary carbocation,and 60
Ð80% of the product (the actual percent-
age depends on the reaction conditions) is the rearranged product.When benzene reacts with 1-chloro-2,2-dimethylpropane,a primary carbocation re-
arranges to a tertiary carbocation. Thus,there is a greater increase in carbocation

stability and,therefore,a greater amount of rearranged product
Ñ100% of the product
(under all reaction conditions) has the rearranged alkyl substituent.
CH3CH3CCH2CH3CCH2CH3a primary carbocation1,2-methyl shiftCH3CH3a tertiary carbocationrearranged alkylsubstituentunrearranged alkyl
substituentCH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH32-phenylbutane65%1-phenylbutane35%1-chlorobutaneAlCl30 CCH3CH2CHCH2CH3CH2CHCH3a primary carbocation1,2-hydride shiftHa secondary carbocationrearranged alkylsubstituentunrearranged alkyl
substituentCH2CCH3CH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3CCH2ClCH3CH3CH3CH3AlCl32-methyl-2-phenylbutane100%2,2-dimethyl-1-phenylpropane0%1-chloro-2,2-dimethylpropaneBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 614
Section 15.15Alkylation of Benzene by Acylation
ÐReduction615PROBLEM 22Show the mechanism for alkylation of benzene by an alkene.
PROBLEM 23What would be the major product of a Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation reaction using the follow-
ing alkyl halides?
a.d.
b.e.

c.f.
15.15Alkylation of Benzene by AcylationÐReductionIt is not possible to obtain a good yield of an alkylbenzene containing a straight-chain
alkyl group via a Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation reaction,because the incipient primary car-
bocation will rearrange to a more stable carbocation.Acylium ions,however,do not rearrange. Consequently,a straight-chain alkyl group
can be placed on a benzene ring by means of a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction,fol-
lowed by reduction of the carbonyl group to a methylene group. It is called a reduction

reaction because the two bonds are replaced by two bonds (Section4.8).

Only a ketone carbonyl group that is adjacent to a benzene ring can be reduced to a

methylene group by catalytic hydrogenation.
(H2/Pd)CHCOCH2CHCH2ClCH3CH2CH(Cl)CH3(CH3)2CHCH2ClCH3CH2CH2Cl(CH3)3CCH2ClCH3CH2ClCHCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2ClAlCl3major productCH2CH2CH2CH3minor productIn addition to reacting with carbocations generated from alkyl halides,benzene
can react with carbocations generated from the reaction of an alkene (Section4.1) or

an alcohol (Section12.1) with an acid.
CHCH3OHCH3CHCH3H2SO4isopropylbenzenecumeneCH3alkylation of benzene by an alcoholalkylation of benzene by an alkeneCHCH2CH3CH3CHCHCH
3HFsec-butylbenzeneCH3CCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH2CH2CClO1. AlCl3acyl-substituted benzenealkyl-substituted benzene
CH2CH2CH2CH32. H2OH2PdBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 615
Besides avoiding carbocation rearrangements,another advantage of preparing alkyl-
substituted benzenes by acylation
Ðreduction rather than by direct alkylation is that a
large excess of benzene does not have to be used (Section15.14). Unlike alkyl-substituted

benzenes,which are more reactive than benzene (Section16.3),acyl-substituted benzenes

are less reactive than benzene,so they will not undergo additional Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions.There are more general methods available to reduce a ketone carbonyl group to a
methylene groupÑmethods that reduce all ketone carbonyl groups,not just those that
are adjacent to benzene rings. Two of the most effective are the Clemmensen reduc-

tion and the Wolff
ÐKishner reduction. The 
Clemmensen reduction
uses an acidicsolution of zinc dissolved in mercury as the reducing reagent. The 
Wolff
ÐKishnerreduction
employs hydrazine under basic conditions. The mechanism of
the Wolff
ÐKishner reduction is shown in Section18.6.
At this point,you may wonder why it is necessary to have more than one way to
carry out the same reaction. Alternative methods are useful when there is another func-

tional group in the molecule that could react with the reagents you are using to carry

out the desired reaction. For example,heating the following compound with HCl (as

required by the Clemmensen reduction) would cause the alcohol to undergo substitu-

tion (Section11.1). Under the basic conditions of the Wolff
ÐKishner reduction,how-
ever,the alcohol group would remain unchanged.
Alkylbenzenes with straight-chain alkyl groups can also be prepared by means of
the coupling reactions you saw in Section12.12. One of the alkyl groups of a Gilman

reagent can replace the halogen of an aryl halide.The Stille reaction
couples an aryl halide with a stannane.CCH3OOHOHZn(Hg), HCl, CH2CH3H2NNH2, HO, CH2CH3ClClemmensenreductionWolffÐKishnerreductionCCH2CH3OZn(Hg), HCl, CH2CH2CH3H2NNH2, HO, CH2CH2CH3(H2NNH2)616CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneE. C. Clemmensen (1876Ð1941)was born in Denmark and received 

a Ph.D. from the University of

Copenhagen. He was a scientist 

at Clemmensen Corp. in Newark,

New York.
Ludwig Wolff (1857
Ð1919)wasborn in Germany. He received a

Ph.D. from the University of

Strasbourg. He was a professor at the

University of Jena in Germany.
N. M. Kishner (1867Ð1935)wasborn in Moscow. He received a Ph.D.

from the University of Moscow under

the direction of Markovnikov. He was

a professor at the University of

Tomsk and later at the University of

Moscow.
tetrapropylstannanePd(PPh3)4THFCH2CH2CH3Br(CH3CH2CH2)4Sn(CH3CH2CH2)3SnBrCH2CH3Br(CH3CH2)2CuLiCH3CH2CuLiBrBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 616
Summary617The Suzuki reaction
couples an aryl halide with an organoborane.
The required organoborane is obtained from the reaction of an alkene with catecholbo-
rane. Because alkenes are readily available,this method can be used to prepare a wide

variety of alkyl benzenes.
PROBLEM 24Describe how the following compounds could be prepared from benzene:
a.b.
CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3catecholboraneCH3CHCH
2OOBHCH
3CH2CH2OOBSummaryTo be classified as 
aromatic
,a compound must have an un-
interrupted cyclic cloud of electrons that contains an 
oddnumber of pairs
of electrons. An 
antiaromatic
com-pound has an uninterrupted cyclic cloud of electrons with

an even number of pairs
of electrons. Molecular orbital
theory shows that aromatic compounds are stable because

their bonding orbitals are completely filled,with no elec-

trons in either nonbonding or antibonding orbitals; in con-

trast,antiaromatic compounds are unstable because they

either are unable to fill their bonding orbitals or they have a

pair of electrons left over after the bonding orbitals are

filled. As a result of their aromaticity,the cyclopentadienyl

anion and the cycloheptatrienyl cation are unusually stable.
An annuleneis a monocyclic hydrocarbon with alternat-
ing single and double bonds. A 
heterocyclic compound
is acyclic compound in which one or more of the ring atoms is a

heteroatom
Ñan atom other than carbon. Pyridine,pyrrole,
furan,and thiophene are aromatic heterocyclic compounds.
BenzeneÕs aromaticity causes it to undergo 
electrophilic
aromatic substitution reactions
. The electrophilic addition
reactions characteristic of alkenes and dienes would lead to

much less stable nonaromatic addition products. The most

common electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions are
halogenation,nitration,sulfonation,and Friedel
ÐCrafts acy-
lation and alkylation. Once the electrophile is generated,all

electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions take place by

the same two-step mechanism:(1)The aromatic compound

reacts with an electrophile,forming a carbocation intermedi-

ate; and (2)a base pulls off a proton from the carbon that
pppppformed the bond with the electrophile. The first step is rela-
tively slow and endergonic because an aromatic compound

is being converted into a much less stable nonaromatic inter-

mediate; the second step is fast and strongly exergonic be-

cause the stability-enhancing aromaticity is being restored.Some monosubstituted benzenes are named as substitutedbenzenes (e.g.,bromobenzene,nitrobenzene); some have

names that incorporate the name of the substituent (e.g.,
toluene,phenol,aniline). Bromination or chlorination re-

quires a Lewis acid catalyst; iodination requires an oxidizing

agent. Nitrationwith nitric acid requires sulfuric acid as a
catalyst. Either an acyl halide or an acid anhydride can be

used for FriedelÐCrafts acylation,a reaction that places an
acyl group on a benzene ring. If the carbocation formed from

the alkyl halide used in a 
FriedelÐCrafts alkylation
reactioncan rearrange,the major product will be the product with the

rearranged alkyl group. A straight-chain alkyl group can be

placed on a benzene ring via a FriedelÐCrafts acylation reac-
tion,followed by reduction of the carbonyl group by catalytic

hydrogenation,a 
Clemmensen reduction
,or a 
Wolff
ÐKishner reduction
. Alkylbenzenes with straight-chain alkyl
groups can also be prepared by means of coupling reactions.
A benzene ring can be sulfonated with fuming or con-centrated sulfuric acid. Sulfonation
is a reversible reac-
tion; heating benzenesulfonic acid in dilute acid removes

the sulfonic acid group. The 
principle of microscopic
reversibility
states that the mechanism of a reaction in the
reverse direction must retrace each step of the mechanism

in the forward direction in microscopic detail.
an organoboranepropylbenzenePd(PPh3)4NaOHCH3CH2CH2OOBNaCH2CH2CH3ClHOOOBBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 617
618CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of BenzeneSummary of Reactions1.Electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions:
a.Halogenation (Section15.10)
b.Nitration,sulfonation,and desulfonation (Sections15.11and 15.12)
c.FriedelÐCrafts acylation and alkylation (Sections15.13and 15.14)
d.Formation of benzaldehyde via a Gatterman
ÐKochreaction (Section15.13)
e.Alkylation with a Gilman reagent (15.15)
f.Alkylation via a Stille reaction (Section15.15)
Pd(PPh3)4THFRBrR4SnR
3SnBrRBr(R)2CuLiRCuLiBrHHClCOhigh pressureAlCl3/CuClCOCORHCl1.  AlCl32.  H2ORClHCl
ROCClRAlCl3excessHNO3H2OH2SO4NO2H2SO4H2OSO3HI2222 H+HNO3IBr2HBrFeBr3BrClCl2HClFeCl3BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 618
g.Alkylation via a Suzuki reaction (Section15.15)
2.Clemmensen reduction and Wolff
ÐKishner reduction (Section15.15)
CROCROZn(Hg), HCl, ClemmensenreductionCH2RCH2RH2NNH2, HO, WolffÐKishnerreductionNaOHPd(PPh3)4ROOBHOOOBNaBrRBrProblems619aliphatic (p.594)
annulene (p.595)

antiaromatic (p.602)

aromatic (p.595)

benzyl group (p.604)

Clemmensen reduction (p.616)

electrophilic aromatic substitutionreaction (p.607)
FriedelÐCrafts acylation (p.607)
FriedelÐCrafts alkylation (p.607)
GattermanÐKoch reaction (p.613)
halogenation (p.607)

heteroatom (p.598)

heterocyclic compound (p.598)

Hckel
Õs rule,or the rule (p.595)
nitration (p.607)
42phenyl group (p.604)
principle of microscopic reversibility
(p.611)
Stille reaction (p.616)

sulfonation (p.607)

Suzuki reaction (p.617)

Wolff
ÐKishner reduction (p.616)
Problems
25.Which of the following compounds are aromatic? Are any antiaromatic? (
Hint:If possible,a ring will be nonplanar to avoid being
antiaromatic.)26.Give the product of the reaction of excess benzene with each of the following reagents:
a.c.
b.d.dichloromethane
AlCl3propeneHFneopentyl chlorideAlCl3isobutyl chlorideAlCl3CH2NHNNNNHHNNHNNHHNNONCH2OKey Terms
BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 619
620CHAPTER 15Arom
aticity ¥ Reactions of Benzene27.Which ion in each of the following pairs is more stable?
28.Which can lose a proton more readily,a methyl group bonded to cyclohexane or a methyl group bonded to benzene?
29.How could you prepare the following compounds with benzene as one of the starting materials?
30.Benzene underwent a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction followed by a Clemmensen reduction. The product gave the following
spectrum. What acyl chloride was used in the Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction?
31.Give the products of the following reactions:
32.Which compound in each of the following pairs is a stronger base? Why?
33.a.In what direction is the dipole moment in fulvene? Explain.
b.In what direction is the dipole moment in calicene? Explain.
caliceneCH2fulveneNorNH2NHCH3CHCH3NHCH3CNH2ora.b.1. AlCl32. H2OCH2CH2CH2CClOd.1. AlCl32. H2OCCH2CH2ClOb.1. AlCl32. H2OCH2CH2CClOc.CCH2CH2CH2ClOa.1. AlCl32. H2O4 (ppm)frequency876
9103210
51H NMRCOa.b.
d.ororb.orc.ora.BRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 620
Problems62134.Purine is a heterocyclic compound with four nitrogen atoms.
a.Which nitrogen is most apt to be protonated?

b.Which nitrogen is least apt to be protonated?
35.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
36.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
37.Show two ways that the following compound could be synthesized:
38.In a reaction called the Birch reduction,benzene can be partially reduced to 1,4-cyclohexadiene by an alkali metal (Na,Li,or
 K) inliquid ammonia and a low-molecular-weight alcohol. Propose a mechanism for this reaction. (
Hint:See Section6.8.)
39.The 
principle of least motion,which states that the reaction that involves the least change in atomic positions or electronic
configuration (all else being equal) is favored,has been suggested to explain why the Birch reduction forms only 1,4-hexadiene.

How does this account for the observation that no 1,3-cyclohexadiene is obtained from a Birch reduction?
40.Investigation has shown that cyclobutadiene is actually a rectangular molecule rather than a square molecule. In addition,it
 hasbeen established that there are two different 1,2-dideuterio-1,3-cyclobutadienes. Explain the reason for these unexpected

observations.
cyclobutadiene1,4-cyclohexadieneNaNH3, CH3CH2OHCOCH3CHCH
2HCH3b.CH2CH2CHCHCH
2CH3HCH2CH3H3Ca.CH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3ClCl
+b.AlCl3CH2CH2CH2CH2Cla.AlCl3purineHNNNNBRUI15-593_621r3  27-03-2003  2:51 PM  Page 621
62216Reactions ofSubstituted BenzenesChlorobenzenemeta-Bromobenzoic acidortho-Chloronitrobenzenepara-Iodobenzenesulfonic acidCHCHNHCCHCl2CH2OHO2Nchloramphenicolan antibiotic that is particularlyeffective against typhoid feverOHO
PEYOTE CULTS
For several centuries,a peyote cult existed among the Aztecs in Mexico,which
later spread to many Native North American tribes. By 1880,a religion that com-
bined Christian beliefs with the Native American use of the peyote cactus had developed in

southwestern United States,primarily among Native Americans. The followers of this religion

believe that the cactus is divinely endowed to shape each personÕs life. Currently,the only people

in the United States who are legally permitted to use peyote are members of the Native Ameri-

can ChurchÑand then only in their religious rites.CH2CH2NH2OCH3CH3OOCH3mescalineactive agent ofthe peyote cactusMany substituted
benzenes are found
in nature. A few that
have physiological activity are adrenaline,melanin,ephedrine,chloramphenicol,and

mescaline.Many physiologically active substituted benzenes are not found in nature,but exist
because chemists have synthesized them. The now-banned diet drug 
Òfen-phenÓis a mixture of two synthetic substituted benzenes:fenfluramine and phentermine. Agent

Orange,a defoliant widely used in the 1960s during the Vietnam War,is also a mix-

ture of two synthetic substituted benzenes:2,4-D and 2,4,5-T. The compound TCDD
CHCH2NHCH3OHHOadrenalineepinephrineOHCHCHNHCH3CH3ephedrinea bronchodilatorOHBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 622
(known as dioxin) is a contaminant formed during the manufacture of Agent Orange.
TCDD has been implicated as the causative agent behind various symptoms suffered

by those exposed to Agent Orange during the war.
Because of the known physiological activities of adrenaline and mescaline,
chemists have synthesized compounds with similar structures. One such compound is

amphetamine,a central nervous system stimulant. Amphetamine and a close relative,

methamphetamine,are used clinically as appetite suppressants. Methamphetamine is

the street drug known as 
ÒspeedÓbecause of its rapid and intense psychological ef-
fects. Two other synthetic substituted benzenes,BHA and BHT,are preservatives (see

Section9.8) found in a wide variety of packaged foods. These compounds represent

just a few of the many substituted benzenes that have been synthesized for commercial

use by the chemical and pharmaceutical industries.In Chapter15,we looked at the reactions benzene undergoes and we saw how
monosubstituted benzenes are named. Now we will see how disubstituted and

polysubstituted benzenes are named,and then we will look at the reactions of

substituted benzenes. The physical properties of several substituted benzenes are given
in AppendixI.
Introduction623CH2CHNHCH2CH3CF3fenfluramineCH3CH2CNH2CH3phentermineCH3saccharinC(CH3)3OCH3butylatedhydroxyanisoleBHAa food antioxidantOOOOHClp-dichlorobenzenemothballs andair freshenersClC(CH3)3(CH3)3CCH3butylatedhydroxytolueneBHTa food antioxidantCNHSOHMEASURING TOXICITYThe toxicity of a compound is indicated by its
value
Ñthe quantity needed to kill 50% of
the test animals exposed to the compound. Dioxin,with an
value of for guinea pigs,is an extremely
toxic compound. Compare this with the values of
LD500.0006 mgkgLD50LD50for strychnine and for sodium cyanide
Ñfar less toxic compounds. One of the most toxic agents known

is the botulism toxin,with an value of about
1108 mgkg.LD5015 mgkg0.96 mgkgOCH2COHClCl2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid2,4-DOOCH2COHClClCl2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid2,4,5-TOClOOClClCl2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo[b,e][1,4]dioxinTCDDCH2CHNH2amphetamineCH3CH3CH2CHNHCH3methamphetamineÒspeedÓCOHOCCH3acetylsalicylic acidaspirinhexachlorophenea disinfectantOOClCl
ClClClClOHHOCH2BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 623
624CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenes16.1Nomenclature of Disubstituted
and Polysubstituted BenzenesDisubstituted BenzenesThe relative positions of two substituents on a benzene ring can be indicated either by
numbers or by the prefixes 
ortho,meta
,and 
para
. Adjacent substituents are called
ortho,substituents separated by one carbon are called 
meta,and substituents located
opposite one another are designated para
. Often,only their abbreviations (
o,m,p) areused in naming compounds.If the two substituents are different,they are listed in alphabetical order. The first
stated substituent is given the 1-position,and the ring is numbered in the direction that

gives the second substituent the lowest possible number.
If one of the substituents can be incorporated into a name (Section 15.7),that name is
used and the incorporated substituent is given the 1-position.
A few disubstituted benzenes have names that incorporate both substituents.
CH3NH2CH3CH3OHpara-cresolused as a wood preservativeuntil prohibited forenvironmental reasonsmeta-xyleneortho-toluidineCH3ClCH3NO2NH2OH2-chlorotolueneortho-chlorotoluenenotortho-chloromethylbenzeneCH2CH34-nitroanilinepara-nitroanilinenotpara-aminonitrobenzene2-ethylphenolortho-ethylphenolnotortho-ethylhydroxybenzeneClI1-chloro-3-iodobenzenemeta-chloroiodobenzenenot1-iodo-3-chlorobenzene ormeta-iodochlorobenzeneBrNO2CH2CH3Cl1-bromo-3-nitrobenzenemeta-bromonitrobenzene1-chloro-4-ethylbenzenepara-chloroethylbenzeneBrBrBrBr
BrBr1,4-dibromobenzenepara-dibromobenzenep-dibromobenzene1,3-dibromobenzenemeta-dibromobenzenem-dibromobenzene1,2-dibromobenzeneortho-dibromobenzeneo-dibromobenzene3-D Molecules:ortho-Toluidine;
meta-Xylene;para-CresolBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 624
PROBLEM 1Name the following compounds:
PROBLEM 2Draw structures of the following compounds:
a.para
-toluidinec.
para
-xyleneb.meta-cresold.
ortho-chlorobenzenesulfonic acidPolysubstituted BenzenesIf the benzene ring has more than two substituents,the substituents are numbered so
that the lowest possible numbers are used. The substituents are listed in alphabetical

order with their appropriate numbers.As with disubstituted benzenes,if one of the substituents can be incorporated into a
name,that name is used and the incorporated substituent is given the 1-position. The

ring is numbered in the direction that results in the lowest possible numbers in the

name of the compound.PROBLEM 3Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.m-chlorotoluenee.2-bromo-4-iodophenol
b.p-bromophenolf.
m-dichlorobenzenec.o-nitroanilineg.2,5-dinitrobenzaldehyde
d.m-chlorobenzonitrileh.
o-xylenePROBLEM 4Correct the following incorrect names:
a.2,4,6-tribromobenzenec.
para
-methylbromobenzeneb.3-hydroxynitrobenzened.1,6-dichlorobenzene
NO2ICH3BrNH2BrClOHCH2CH32-ethyl-4-iodoaniline3-bromo-4-chlorophenol5-bromo-2-nitrotolueneSection 16.1Nomenclature of Disubstituted and Polysubstituted Benzenes
625OCH2CH3OHClBr
BrCCH3HCH2CH3a.b.c.d.
111222333444NO2NO2O2NBrBrBrClClCl1-bromo-4-chloro-2-nitrobenzene4-bromo-1-chloro-2-nitrobenzene2-bromo-4-chloro-1-nitrobenzeneBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 625
626CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenes16.2Reactions of Substituents on BenzeneIn Chapter15,you learned how to prepare benzene rings with halo,nitro,sulfonic acid,
alkyl,and acyl substituents.
Benzene rings with other substituents can be prepared by first synthesizing one of these
substituted benzenes and then chemically changing the substituent. Several of these re-

actions should be familiar.
Reactions of Alkyl SubstituentsWe have seen that a bromine will selectively substitute for a benzylic hydrogen in a

radical substitution reaction. (NBS stands for N-bromosuccinimide; Section9.5.)
Once a halogen has been placed in the benzylic position,it can be replaced by a
nucleophile by means of an or an reaction (Section10.8). A wide variety of

substituted benzenes can be prepared this way.
SN1SN2CH2CH2CH3propylbenzeneBrHBrNBSCHCH2CH31-bromo-1-phenylpropaneperoxide
NO2BrBr2FeBr3RRClAlCl3CRRCClOO1. AlCl32. H2OHNO3H2SO4SO3HH2SO4BrHOCH2OHBrNCCH2BrBrNH3CH2NH3CH2CNHOCH2NH2H2OBrbenzyl alcoholphenylacetonitrilebenzyl bromidebenzylamineBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 626
Section 16.2Reactions of Substituents on Benzene
627Remember that halo-substituted alkyl groups can also undergo E2 and E1 reactions
(Section11.8). Notice that a bulky base is used to encourage elimination

over substitution.
Substituents with double and triple bonds can undergo catalytic hydrogenation
(Section4.11). Addition of hydrogen to a double or triple bond is an example of a

reduction reaction (Section4.8). When an organic compound is 
reduced
,either the
number of bonds in the compound increases or the number of 

or (where X denotes a halogen atom) bonds decreases (Section20.0).
Recall that benzene is an unusually stable compound (Section7.11). It,therefore,can
be reduced only at high temperature and pressure.An alkyl group bonded to a benzene ring can be oxidized to a carboxyl group. When
an organic compound is 
oxidized,either the number of or (where
X denotes a halogen atom) bonds increases or the number of bonds decreases

(Section20.0). Commonly used oxidizing agents are potassium permanganate 

or acidic solutions of sodium dichromate Because the benzene ring is

so stable,it will not be oxidized
Ñonly the alkyl group is oxidized.
Regardless of the length of the alkyl substituent,it will be oxidized to a COOH group,
provided that a hydrogen is bonded to the benzylic carbon.
CH3toluene1. KMnO4,2. HCOOHbenzoic acidNa2Cr2O7).(H,(KMnO4)CHCXCN,CO,Ni175 C, 180 atm3 H2cyclohexanebenzeneNiCOCH2OHHH2benzyl alcoholbenzaldehydePtCN2H2CH2NH2benzylaminebenzonitrilePtCHCH
2H2CH2CH3ethylbenzenestyreneCXCN,CO,CHCHCH3Br1-bromo-1-phenylethaneCHCH
2styrenetert-BuO(tert-BuO)3-D Molecules:Benzyl bromide;
Styrene;
Benzonitrile;
BenzaldehydeBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 627
628CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesIf the alkyl group lacks a benzylic hydrogen,the oxidation reaction will not occur
because the first step in the oxidation reaction is removal of a hydrogen from the ben-

zylic carbon.The same reagents that oxidize alkyl substituents will oxidize benzylic alcohols to
benzoic acid.If,however,a mild oxidizing agent such as is used,benzylic alcohols are oxi-
dized to aldehydes or ketones.
Reducing a Nitro Substituent
A nitro substituent can be reduced to an amino substituent. Either a metal (tin,iron,or

zinc) plus an acid (HCl) or catalytic hydrogenation can be used to carry out the reduc-

tion. Recall from Section1.20that if acidic conditions are employed,the product will

be in its acidic form (anilinium ion). When the reaction is over,base can be added to

convert the product into its basic form (aniline).
MnO2OHCH2OCHphenylmethanolbenzyl alcoholbenzaldehydeMnO2OHCHCH3OCCH3acetophenone1-phenylethanolMnO2Na2Cr2O7, HOHCHCH3OCOHbenzoic acid1-phenylethanolCCH
3tert-butylbenzeneno reactionCH3CH3Na2Cr2O7, Hdoes not have abenzylic hydrogenCOOHCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3Na2Cr2O7, HCOOHm-butylisopropylbenzenem-benzenedicarboxylic acidBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 628
It is possible to selectively reduce just one of two nitro groups.
PROBLEM 5Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 6SOLVED
Show how the following compounds could be prepared from benzene:
a.benzaldehydec.1-bromo-2-phenylethanee.aniline
b.styrened.2-phenyl-1-ethanolf.benzoic acid
SOLUTION TO 6a16.3The Effect of Substituents on Reactivity
Like benzene,substituted benzenes undergo the five electrophilic aromatic substitu-
tion reactions discussed in Chapter15and listed in Section16.2:halogenation,nitra-

tion,sulfonation,alkylation,and acylation. Now we need to find out whether a

substituted benzene is more reactive or less reactive than benzene itself. The answer
N1. NBS//peroxide2. C3. H2/NiCH3Na2Cr2O7, HCH3CH2CH31. NBS//peroxide2. CH3OCH3Na2Cr2O7, HCH3CHCH3(NH4)2Smeta-dinitrobenzeneNO2NO2meta-nitroanilineNO2NH2H2Pd/CH2OSn, HClHO
NH3anilinenitrobenzeneprotonated
anilineanilinium ionNO2NO2NH2NH2Section 16.3The Effect of Substituents on Reactivity
6293-D Molecule:NitrobenzeneCH3ClAlCl3NBS, peroxideCH3HOMnO2CH2OHC
OHCH2BrBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 629
630CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesElectron-donating substituents
increase the reactivity of the benzene

ring toward electrophilic aromatic

substitution.Electron-withdrawing substituents
decrease the reactivity of the benzene

ring toward electrophilic aromatic

substitution.depends on the substituent. Some substituents make the ring more reactive and some
make it less reactive than benzene toward electrophilic aromatic substitution.
The slow step of an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction is the addition of an
electrophile to the nucleophilic aromatic ring to form a carbocation intermediate

(Section15.9). 
Substituents that are capable of donating electrons into the benzene
ring will stabilize both the carbocation intermediate and the transition state leading to

its formation
(Section4.3),
thereby increasing the rate of electrophilic aromatic
substitution. In contrast,substituents that withdraw electrons from the benzene ring

will destabilize the carbocation intermediate and the transition state leading to its

formation,thereby decreasing the rate of electrophilic aromatic substitution
(Sec-tion16.4).Before we see how the carbocation intermediate is stabilized by electron

donation and destabilized by electron withdrawal,we will look at the ways in which a

substituent can donate or withdraw electrons.
There are two ways substituents can donate electrons into a benzene ring:
inductiveelectron donation and electron donation by resonance
. There are also two ways sub-
stituents can withdraw electrons from a benzene ring:
inductiveelectron withdrawal
and electron withdrawal by 
resonance
.Inductive Electron Donation and Withdrawal
If a substituent that is bonded to a benzene ring is 
less electron withdrawing than a
hydrogen
,the electrons in the bond that attaches the substituent to the benzene ring
will move toward the ring more readily than will those in the bond that attaches the

hydrogen to the ring. Such a substituent donates electrons inductively compared with

a hydrogen. Donation of electrons through a bond is called 
inductive electron
donation(Section1.18). Alkyl substituents (such as ) donate electrons inductive-
ly compared with a hydrogen.Notice that the electron-donating ability of an alkyl group
Ñnot the electron-
donating ability of a carbon atomÑis compared with that of hydrogen. Carbon is
actually slightly less electron donating than hydrogen (because C is more electronega-

tive than H; see Table1.3),but an alkyl group is more electron donating than hydrogen

because of hyperconjugation (Section4.2).
If a substituent is more electron withdrawing than a hydrogen
,it will withdraw the
electrons away from the benzene ring more strongly than will a hydrogen. With-
drawal of electrons through a bond is called 
inductive electron withdrawal
.The
group is a substituent that withdraws electrons inductively because it is more
electronegative than a hydrogen.
Resonance Electron Donation and Withdrawal
If a substituent has a lone pair on the atom that is directly attached to the benzene ring,

the lone pair can be delocalized into the ring; these substituents are said to donateelectrons by resonance
. Substituents such as OH,OR,and Cl donate electrons
by resonance. These substituents also withdraw electrons inductively because the

atom attached to the benzene ring is more electronegative than a hydrogen.
NH2,NH3ssCH3NH3substituent donateselectrons inductively
(compared with a
hydrogen)substituent withdrawselectrons inductively
(compared with a
hydrogen)CH3sssZ donates electrons
into the benzene ringY withdraws electronsfrom the benzene ringZYrelative rates of electrophilic substitutionBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 630
If a substituent is attached to the benzene ring by an atom that is doubly or triply
bonded to a more electronegative atom,the electrons of the ring can be delocalized

onto the substituent; these substituents are said to withdraw electrons by resonance
.Substituents such as and withdraw electrons by resonance. These

substituents also withdraw electrons inductively because the atom attached to the

benzene ring has a full or partial positive change and,therefore,is more electronega-

tive than a hydrogen.
PROBLEM 7For each of the following substituents,indicate whether it donates electrons inductively,
withdraws electrons inductively,donates electrons by resonance,or withdraws electrons

by resonance (inductive effects should be compared with a hydrogen; remember that many

substituents can be characterized in more than one way):
a.Brc.e.
b.d.f.
Relative Reactivity of Substituted BenzenesThe substituents shown in Table16.1are listed according to how they affect the reac-
tivity of the benzene ring toward electrophilic aromatic substitution compared with

benzeneÑin which the substituent is a hydrogen. 
Theactivating substituents
make
the benzene ring more reactive toward electrophilic substitution; the
deactivating
substituentsmake the benzene ring less reactive toward electrophilic substitution
.Remember that activating substituents donate electrons into the ring and deactivating

substituents withdraw electrons from the ring.
All the strongly activating substituents
donate electrons into the ring by resonance
and withdraw electrons from the ring inductively. The fact that they have been found

experimentally to be strong activators indicates that electron donation into the ring by

resonance is more significant than inductive electron withdrawal from the ring.
strongly activating substituentsNH2OHORN(CH3)3NHCH3CH2CH3OCH3OCCH3NOwithdrawal of electrons from a benzene ring by resonanceONOONOONOONOONO2CN,CO,pOCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3donation of electrons into a benzene ring by resonanceSection 16.3The Effect of Substituents on Reactivity
631Tutorial:
Donation of electrons
into a benzene ringTutorial:
Withdrawal of electrons
from a benzene ringanisolenitrobenzeneBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 631
632CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesTable 16.1
The Effects of Substituents on the Reactivity of a Benzene Ring
Toward Electrophilic Substitution
NH2NHRNR2OH
ORNHCROOCRRAr
CHCHR
HActivating substituentsMost activating
StronglyactivatingOrtho/paradirectingModeratelyactivatingWeaklyactivatingWeaklydeactivatingStronglydeactivatingModeratelydeactivatingStandard of comparisonFCl
Br
IDeactivating substituentsOCHOCROCOROCOHOCClCN
SO3HNR3NO2Most deactivatingONH2R Meta directingNHR2 NH3 The moderately activating substituents
also donate electrons into the ring by reso-
nance and withdraw electrons from the ring inductively. Because they are only moder-

ately activating,we know that they donate electrons into the ring by resonance less

effectively than do the strongly activating substituents.
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 632
Section 16.3The Effect of Substituents on Reactivity
633These substituents are less effective at donating electrons into the ring by resonance
because,unlike the strongly activating substituents that donate electrons by resonance

only intothe ring,the moderately activating substituents can donate electrons by reso-
nance in two competing directions:
intothe ring and away from
the ring. The fact that
these substituents are activators indicates that,despite their diminished resonance

electron donation into the ring,overall they donate electrons by resonance more

strongly than they withdraw electrons inductively.
Alkyl,aryl,and groups are 
weakly activating substituents. We have
seen that an alkyl substituent,compared with a hydrogen,donates electrons induc-

tively. Aryl and groups can donate electrons into the ring by resonance

and can withdraw electrons from the ring by resonance. The fact that they are weak

activators indicates that they are slightly more electron donating than they are elec-

tron withdrawing.
The halogens are weakly deactivating substituents; they donate electrons into the
ring by resonance and withdraw electrons from the ring inductively. Because the halo-

gens have been found experimentally to be deactivators,we can conclude that they

withdraw electrons inductively more strongly than they donate electrons by resonance.
weakly deactivating substituentsFClBrI
RCHCHR
weakly activating substituentsCHCHRCHCHROOHNCCH
3CCH3HNsubstituent donateselectrons by resonance
away from the benzene
ring OOmoderately activating substituentsNHO
CRCR
OOOOO
HNCCH3HNCCH3HNCCH3HNCCH3HNCCH3substituent donateselectrons by resonance
into the benzene ring BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 633
The moderately deactivating substituents
all have carbonyl groups directly attached to
the benzene ring. Carbonyl groups withdraw electrons both inductively and by resonance.
The strongly deactivating substituents
are powerful electron withdrawers. Except
for the ammonium ions (and ),these substituents with-

draw electrons both inductively and by resonance. The ammonium ions have no reso-

nance effect,but the positive charge on the nitrogen atom causes them to strongly

withdraw electrons inductively.
Take a minute to compare the electrostatic potential maps for anisole,benzene,and
nitrobenzene. Notice that an electron-donating substituent makes the ring

more red (more negative),whereas an electron-withdrawing substituent makes

the ring less red (less negative).
PROBLEM 8List the members of the following sets of compounds in order of decreasing reactivity to-
ward electrophilic aromatic substitution:
a.benzene,phenol,toluene,nitrobenzene,bromobenzene
b.dichloromethylbenzene,difluoromethylbenzene,toluene,chloromethylbenzene
PROBLEM 9SOLVED
Explain why the halo-substituted benzenes have the relative reactivities shown in Table16.1.
SOLUTIONTable16.1shows that fluorine is the least deactivating of the halogen sub-
stituents and iodine is the most deactivating. We know that fluorine is the most electroneg-

ative of the halogens,which means that it is best at withdrawing electrons inductively.

Fluorine is also best at donating electrons by resonance because its 2
porbitalÑcomparedwith the 3
porbital of chlorine,the 4
porbital of bromine,or the 5
porbital of iodine
Ñcanbetter overlap with the 2
porbital of carbon. So the fluorine substituent is best both at do-
nating electrons by resonance and at withdrawing electrons inductively. Because the table

shows that fluorine is the weakest deactivator of the halogens,we can conclude that elec-

tron donation by resonance is the more important factor in determining the relative reactiv-

ities of halo-substituted benzenes.(NO2)(OCH3)OOOSOOHNCNNR
3strongly deactivating substituentsNR3NHR2,NH2R,NH3,moderately deactivating substituentsCHOCROCOROCOHO634CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesMissing Size Art AABTGVN0
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 634
Section 16.4The Effect of Substituents on Orientation
6353-D Molecules:Toluene;

BromobenzeneAll activating substituents are
orthoÐpara directors.
The weakly deactivating halogens are
orthoÐpara directors.
16.4The Effect of Substituents on Orientation
When a substituted benzene undergoes an electrophilic substitution reaction,where
does the new substituent attach itself? Is the product of the reaction the ortho isomer,

the meta isomer,or the para isomer?
The substituent already attached to the benzene ring determines the location of the
new substituent. There are two possibilities:A substituent will direct an incoming sub-

stituent either to the ortho andpara positions,or it will direct an incoming substituent
to the meta position. All activating substituents and the weakly deactivating halogens

are orthoÐpara directors
,and all substituents that are more deactivating than the
halogens are meta directors
.Thus,the substituents can be divided into three groups:
1.All activating substituents direct an incoming electrophile to the ortho and para
positions.2.The weakly deactivating halogens also direct an incoming electrophile to the
ortho and para positions.3.All moderately deactivating and strongly deactivating substituents direct an in-
coming electrophile to the meta position.m-bromonitrobenzenenitrobenzeneFeBr3Br2NO2NO2Brm-nitroacetophenoneacetophenoneH2SO4HNO3COCH3COCH3NO2p-bromochlorobenzeneo-bromochlorobenzenebromobenzeneFeCl3Cl2BrBrBr
ClClp-bromotolueneo-bromotoluenetolueneFeBr3Br2CH3CH3CH3BrBrpara isomermeta isomerortho isomerYoror
XXYXYXYAll deactivating substituents (except thehalogens) are meta directors.
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 635
636CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHCH3CH3 YCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3tolueneorthometaparamost stablemost stableFigure 16.1
The structures of the carbocation intermediates formed from the reaction of anelectrophile with toluene at the ortho, meta, and para positions.3-D Molecules:Acetophenone;
Nitrobenzene3-D Molecule:AnisoleTo understand why a substituent directs an incoming electrophile to a particular
position,we must look at the stability of the carbocation intermediate that is formed in

the rate-determining step. When a substituted benzene undergoes an electrophilic sub-

stitution reaction,three different carbocation intermediates can be formed:an 
ortho-substituted carbocation,a 
meta-substituted carbocation,and a 
para
-substitutedcarbocation (Figure16.1). The relative stabilities of the three carbocations enable us to

determine the preferred pathway of the reaction because the more stable the carboca-

tion,the less energy required to make it and the more likely it is that it will be formed

(Section4.3).
If a substituentdonates electrons 
inductivelyÑa methyl group,for example
Ñtheindicated resonance contributors in Figure16.1are the most stable; the substituent is

attached directly to the positively charged carbon,which the substituent can stabilize

by inductive electron donation. These relatively stable resonance contributors are ob-

tained only when the incoming group is directed to an ortho or para position. There-

fore,the most stable carbocation is obtained by directing the incoming group to the

ortho and para positions. Thus,
any substituent that donates electrons inductively is an
orthoÐpara director
.Tutorial:
Intermediates in electrophilic
aromatic substitutionIf a substituent donates electrons by resonance
,the carbocations formed by putting
the incoming electrophile on the ortho and para positions have a fourth resonance

contributor (Figure16.2). This is an especially stable resonance contributor because it

is the only one whose atoms (except for hydrogen) all have complete octets. Therefore,

all substituents that donate electrons by resonance are orthoÐpara directors
.Substituentswith a positive charge or a partial positive charge on the atom attached
to the benzene ring,withdraw electrons inductively from the benzene ring,and most

withdraw electrons by resonance as well. For all such substituents,the indicated reso-

nance contributors in Figure16.3are the least stable because they have a positive

charge on each of two adjacent atoms,so the most stable carbocation is formed when

the incoming electrophile is directed to the meta position. Thus,
all substituents thatwithdraw electrons (except for the halogens,which are orthoÐpara directors because

they donate electrons by resonance) are meta directors
.BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 636
Section 16.4The Effect of Substituents on Orientation
637anisoleYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHOCH3YOCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3orthometapararelatively stablerelatively stableOCH3Figure 16.2
The structures of the carbocation intermediates formed from the reaction of anelectrophile with anisole at the ortho, meta, and para positions.YHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYHYNH3NH3NH3NH3NH3NH3NH3NH3NH3NH3orthometaparaleast stableleast stableprotonatedanilineFigure 16.3
The structures of the carbocation intermediates formed from the reaction of anelectrophile with protonated aniline at the ortho, meta, and para positions.Notice that the three possible carbocation intermediates in Figures16.1and 16.3are
the same,except for the substituent. The nature of the substituent determines whether the

resonance contributors with the substituent directly attached to the positively charged
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 637
638CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesAll substituents that donate electrons
into the ring either inductively or by
resonance are ortho
Ðpara directors.
carbon are the most stable (electron-donating substituents) or the least stable (electron-withdrawing substituents).
The only deactivating substituents that are ortho
Ðpara directors are the halogens,which are the weakest of the deactivators. We have seen that they are deactivators

because they inductively withdraw electrons from the ring more strongly than they do-

nate electrons by resonance. The halogens nevertheless are ortho
Ðpara directorsbecause of their ability to donate electrons by resonance; they can stabilize the transi-

tion states leading to reaction at the ortho and para positions by resonance electron
donation (Figure16.2).
In summary,as shown in Table16.1,the halogens and all the activating substituents
are orthoÐpara directors. All substituents more deactivating than the halogens are meta
directors. Put another way,
all substituents that donate electrons into the ring induc-
tively or by resonance are orthoÐpara directors,and all substituents that cannot

donate electrons into the ring inductively or by resonance are meta directors
.You don
Õt need to resort to memorization to determine whether a substituent is anorthoÐpara director or a meta director. It is easy to tell them apart:All ortho
Ðparadirectors,except for alkyl,aryl,and groups,have at least one lone pair on

the atom directly attached to the ring; all meta directors have a positive charge or a

partial positive charge on the atom attached to the ring. Take a few minutes to examine

the substituents listed in Table16.1to convince yourself that this is true.
PROBLEM 10a.Draw the resonance contributors for nitrobenzene.
b.Draw the resonance contributors for chlorobenzene.
PROBLEM 11What product(s) would result from nitration of each of the following compounds?
a.propylbenzened.benzenesulfonic acid
b.bromobenzenee.cyclohexylbenzene
c.benzaldehydef.benzonitrile
PROBLEM 12Are the following substituents ortho
Ðpara directors or meta directors?a.c.e.

b.d.COOHf.
16.5The Effect of Substituents on 
We have seen that electron-withdrawing substituents increase the acidity of a com-
pound (Sections1.18and 7.10). Therefore,when a substituent either withdraws elec-

trons from or donates electrons into a benzene ring,the values of substituted

phenols,benzoic acids,and protonated anilines will reflect this withdrawal or dona-

tion. For example,the of phenol in at 25
¡C is 9.95. The of 
para
-nitro-phenol is lower (7.14) because the nitro substituent withdraws electrons from the ring,

whereas the of 
para
-methyl phenol is higher (10.19) because the methyl sub-
stituent donates electrons into the ring.papaH2OpapapKaNONO2CF3CH2OHCH2CHCNCHCHRAll substituents that cannot donateelectrons into the ring either inductively

or by resonance are meta directors.
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 638
Section 16.5The Effect of Substituents on 
639pKaThe more deactivating (electron
withdrawing) the substituent, the more

it increases the acidity of a COOH, an OH,

or an group attached to a benzene

ring.NH3Take a minute to compare the influence a substituent has on the reactivity of a ben-
zene ring toward electrophilic substitution with its effect on the of phenol. Notice

that the more strongly deactivating the substituent,the lower the of the phenol;

and the more strongly activating the substituent,the higher the of the phenol. In

other words,
electron withdrawal decreases reactivity toward electrophilic substitu-
tion and increases acidity,whereas electron donation increases reactivity toward elec-

trophilic substitution and decreases acidity
.A similar substituent effect on is observed for substituted benzoic acids and
substituted protonated anilines.PROBLEM 13Which of the compounds in each of the following pairs is more acidic?
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
FCl
COOHorCOOHOCH3COOHorCOOHFCH2COHor
OClCH2COHOCH3CH2COHor
OH3NCH2COHOHCOHor
OCH3COHOO2NCH2COHor
OO2NCH2CH2COHOHOCCH2COHor
OOOCCH2COHOOCH3COHor
OClCH2COHO
NH3OCH3NH3CH3NH3NH3BrNH3HCO
NH3NO2pKa  5.29p
Ka  5.07p
Ka  4.58p
Ka  3.91p
Ka  1.76p
Ka  0.98OCH3COOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOH
CH3CCH3BrONO
2pKa  4.47p
Ka  4.34p
Ka  4.20p
Ka  4.00p
Ka  3.70p
Ka  3.44papapapaTutorial:
Effect of substituents on p
KapKa  10.20p
Ka  10.19p
Ka  9.95p
Ka  9.38p
Ka  7.66p
Ka  7.14OHOCH3OH
CH3OHOH
ClOHHCO
OHNO2phenolBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 639
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
The para
-nitroanilinium ion is units more acidic than the anilinium ion
(versus 4.58),but 
para
-nitrobenzoic acid is only unit more acidic
than benzoic acid (versus 4.20). Explain why the nitro substituent causes a

large change in in the one case and a small change in in the other.
DonÕt expect to be able to solve this kind of problem simply by reading it. First,you
need to remember that the acidity of a compound depends on the stability of its conjugate

base (Sections1.18and 7.10). Next,draw structures of the conjugate bases in question and

compare their stabilities.When a proton is lost from the para
-nitroanilinium ion,the electrons that are left behind are
shared by five atoms. (Draw resonance contributors if you want to see which atoms share the

electrons.) When a proton is lost from 
para
-nitrobenzoic acid,the electrons that are left
behind are shared by two atoms. In other words,loss of a proton leads to greater electron

delocalization in one base than in the other base. Because electron delocalization stabilizes a
compound,we now know why the addition of a nitro substituent has a greater effect on the

acidity of an anilinium ion than on benzoic acid. Now continue on to Problem14.
PROBLEM 14p-Nitrophenol has a of 7.14,whereas the of 
m-nitrophenol is 8.39. Explain.16.6The OrthoÐPara RatioWhen a benzene ring with an ortho
Ðpara-directing substituent undergoes an elec-
trophilic aromatic substitution reaction,what percentage of the product is the ortho

isomer and what percentage is the para isomer? Solely on the basis of probability,one

would expect more of the ortho product because there are two ortho positions available

to the incoming electrophile and only one para position. The ortho position,however,

is sterically hindered,whereas the para position is not. Consequently,the para isomer

will be formed preferentially if either the substituent on the ring or the incoming elec-
trophile is large. The following nitration reactions illustrate the decrease in the

orthoÐpara ratio with an increase in the size of the alkyl substituent:
50%p-ethylnitrobenzene50%o-ethylnitrobenzeneethylbenzeneH2SO4HNO3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3NO2NO239%p-nitrotoluene61%o-nitrotoluenetolueneH2SO4HNO3CH3CH3CH3NO2NO2papaNNH
2OONCO
OOOpapapa3.440.76 papa0.983.60 pa640CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 640
Section 16.7Additional Considerations Regarding Substituent Effects
641Fortunately,the difference in the physical properties of the ortho-and para-substi-
tuted isomers is sufficient to allow them to be easily separated. Consequently,elec-

trophilic aromatic substitution reactions that lead to both ortho and para isomers are

useful in synthetic schemes because the desired product can be easily separated from
the reaction mixture.16.7Additional Considerations Regarding
Substituent Effects
It is important to know whether a substituent is activating or deactivating in determin-
ing the conditions needed to carry out a reaction. For example,methoxy and hydroxy

substituents are so strongly activating that halogenation is carried out without the

Lewis acid (or ) catalyst.
If the Lewis acid catalyst and excess bromine are used,the tribromide is obtained.
All FriedelÐCrafts reactions require the Lewis acid catalyst. However,if there is a
meta director on the ring (remember that all meta directors are moderate or strong

deactivators),the ring will be too unreactive to undergo either Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation
or FriedelÐCrafts alkylation.
SO3HbenzenesulfonicacidCH3CClno reactionOAlCl3NO2nitrobenzeneCH3CH2Clno reactionAlCl32,4,6-tribromoanisoleanisole3 Br2OCH3OCH3BrBrBrFeBr3p-bromoanisoleo-bromoanisoleanisoleBr2OCH3OCH3OCH3BrBrFeCl3FeBr3A benzene ring with a meta director
cannot undergo a FriedelÐCraftsreaction.
82%p-tert-butylnitrobenzene18%o-tert-butylnitrobenzenetert-butylbenzeneH2SO4HNO3C(CH3)3C(CH3)3C(CH3)3NO2NO2BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 641
642CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesAniline and N-substituted anilines also do not undergo Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions. The
lone pair on the amino group will complex with the Lewis acid that is needed

to carry out the reaction,converting the substituent into a deactivating meta

director. As we have just seen,Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions do not occur with benzene
rings containing meta-directing substituents.Phenol and anisole undergo Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions
Ñorienting ortho and paraÑbe-cause oxygen,being a weaker base than nitrogen,does not complex with the Lewis acid.
Anilinealso cannot be nitrated because nitric acid is an oxidizing agent and prima-
ry amines are easily oxidized. (Nitric acid and aniline can be an explosive combina-

tion.) Tertiary aromatic amines,however,can be nitrated. Because the tertiary amino

group is a strong activator,nitration is carried out with nitric acid in acetic acid,a

milder combination than nitric acid in sulfuric acid. About twice as much para isomer

is formed as ortho isomer.
PROBLEM 15Give the products,if any,of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 16When N,N-dimethylaniline is nitrated,some 
meta-nitro-N,N-dimethylaniline is formed.Why does the meta isomer form? (Hint:The of N,N-dimethylaniline is 5.07,and more
meta isomer is formed if the reaction is carried out at than if it is carried out 

at )
16.8Designing a Synthesis III: Synthesis ofMonosubstituted and Disubstituted BenzenesAs the number of reactions with wich we are familiar increases,we have more reac-
tions to choose from when we design a synthesis. For example,we can now design two

very different routes for the synthesis of 2-phenylethanol from benzene.
BrMgBr
CH2CH2OHBr2FeBr3MgEt2O1.  O2.  H  2-phenylethanolpH4.5.pH3.5pabenzene2 CH3ClAlCl3aniline3 Br2benzoic acidCH3CH2ClAlCl3benzonitrilemethyl chlorideAlCl3anilineH2NAlCl3AlCl3H2Na meta director   NH2(AlCl3)3-D Molecules:N,N-Dimethylaniline;o-Nitro-N,N-dimethylanilineN(CH3)2N,N-dimethylanilineN(CH3)2NO2o-nitro-N,N-dimethylanilineN(CH3)2NO2p-nitro-N,N-dimethylaniline1. HNO32. HO -CH3COOHBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 642
Section 16.8Designing a Synthesis III: Synthesis of Monosubstituted and Disubstituted Benzenes
643Which route we choose depends on how easy it is to carry out the required reactions
and also on the expected yield of the target molecule (the desired product). For exam-

ple,the first route shown for the synthesis of 2-phenylethanol is the better procedure.

The second route has more steps; it requires excess benzene to prevent polyalkyla-

tion;it uses a radical reaction that can produce unwanted side products; the yield of the

elimination reaction is not high (because some substitution product is formed as well);

and hydroborationÐoxidation is not an easy reaction to carry out.In designingthe synthesis of disubstituted benzenes,you must consider carefully
the order in which the substituents are to be placed on the ring. For example,if you

want to synthesize 
meta-bromobenzenesulfonic acid,the sulfonic acid group has to be
placed on the ring first because that group will direct the bromo substituent to the

desired meta position.However,if the desired product is 
para
-bromobenzenesulfonic acid,the order of
the two reactions must be reversed because only the bromo substituent is an ortho
Ðpara director.
Both substituents of meta-nitroacetophenone are meta directors. However,the
FriedelÐCrafts acylation reaction must be carried out first because the benzene ring of
nitrobenzene is too deactivated to undergo a Friedel
ÐCrafts reaction (Section16.7).
It is also important to determine the point in a reaction sequence at which a sub-
stituent should be chemically modified. In the synthesis of 
para
-chlorobenzoic acidfrom toluene,the methyl group is oxidized after it directs the chloro substituent to the

para position. (ortho-Chlorobenzoic acid is also formed in this reaction.)CCH3CH3OOCH3CClCNO2Om-nitroacetophenone1. AlCl3HNO3H2SO4H2SO42. H2OBrBr
SO3Hp-bromobenzenesulfonicacidBrSO3Ho-bromobenzenesulfonic acidH2SO4Br2FeBr3SO3HSO3HBrH2SO4Br2m-bromobenzenesulfonic acidFeBr3Tutorial:
Multistep synthesis of
disubstituted benzenesCH2CH3CHCH3BrCHCH
2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2BrAlCl3peroxideexcess1. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2, H2ONBS, tert-BuO2-phenylethanolBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 643
644CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesIn the synthesis of meta-chlorobenzoic acid,the methyl group is oxidized before
chlorination because a meta director is needed to obtain the desired product.In the following synthesis of 
para
-propylbenzenesulfonic acid,the type of reaction
employed,the order in which the substituents are put on the benzene ring,and the point at

which a substituent is chemically modified must all be considered:The straight-chain

propyl substituent must be put on the ring by a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction because
of the carbocation rearrangement that would occur with a Friedel
ÐCrafts alkylation
reaction. The Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation must be carried out before sulfonation because
acylation could not be carried out on a ring with a strongly deactivating sulfonic acid sub-

stituent,and the sulfonic acid group is a meta director. Finally,the sulfonic acid group

must be put on the ring after the carbonyl group is reduced to a methylene group,so that

the sulfonic acid group will be directed primarily to the para position by the alkyl group.
PROBLEM 17Show how each of the following compounds can be synthesized from benzene:
a.p-chloroanilinee.
m-bromopropylbenzene
b.m-chloroanilinef.
o-bromopropylbenzene
c.p-nitrobenzoic acidg.1-phenyl-2-propanol
d.m-nitrobenzoic acidh.2-phenylpropene
16.9Synthesis of Trisubstituted Benzenes
When a disubstituted benzene undergoes an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction,
the directing effect of both substituents has to be considered. If both substituents direct the

incoming substituent to the same position,the product of the reaction is easily predicted.
CH3NO2HNO3both the methyl and nitro substituentsdirect the incoming substituent
to these positionsp-nitrotolueneCH3NO2NO22,4-dinitrotolueneH2SO4CH3COOHClCOOHmeta-chlorobenzoic acidCl2FeCl3Na2Cr2O7, HCH3CH3ClCl
COOHpara-chlorobenzoic acidCl2FeCl3KMnO4, H3-D Molecules:p-Nitrotoluene;m-Chlorotoluene;p-Methylphenol;p-ChlorotolueneCCH2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3HO3SOpara-propylbenzenesulfonic acidZn(Hg)HClH2SO41. CH3CH2CClOAlCl32. H2OBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 644
Notice that three positions are activated in the following reaction,but the new sub-
stituent ends up on only two of the three positions. Steric hindrance makes the position

between the substituents less accessible.If the two substituents direct the new substituent to different positions,a strongly
activating substituent will win out over a weakly activating substituent or a deactivat-

ing substituent.If the two substituents have similar activating properties,neither will dominate and
a mixture of products will be obtained.PROBLEM 18Give the major product(s) of each of the following reactions:
a.nitration of 
p-fluoroanisoleb.chlorination of 
o-benzenedicarboxylic acidc.bromination of 
p-chlorobenzoic acidPROBLEM 19SOLVED
When phenol is treated with a mixture of monobromo-,dibromo-,and tribromophe-
nols is obtained. Design a synthesis that would convert phenol primarily to 
ortho-bromophenol.SOLUTIONThe bulky sulfonic acid group will add preferentially to the para position.
Both the OH and groups will direct bromine to the position ortho to the OH group.
SO3HBr2,H2SO4CH3ClHNO3p-chlorotolueneClCl
CH3NO24-chloro-2-nitrotolueneCH3NO24-chloro-3-nitrotolueneCH3 directs hereCl directs hereOHCH3Br2p-methylphenol2-bromo-
4-methylphenolmajor productOHCH3BrOH directs hereCH3 directs hereCH3ClHNO3m-chlorotolueneClCl
CH3O2N5-chloro-2-nitrotolueneCH3NO23-chloro-4-nitrotolueneH2SO4both the methyl and chloro substituents direct the incoming substituent to these 
indicated positionsSection 16.9Synthesis of Trisubstituted Benzenes
645BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 645
646CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesHeating in dilute acid removes the sulfonic acid group (Section15.12). Using a sulfonic
acid group to block the para position is a method commonly employed to synthesize high

yields of ortho-substituted compounds.16.10Synthesis of Substituted BenzenesUsing Arenediazonium Salts
So far,we have learned how to place a limited number of different substituents on a
benzene ringÑthose substituents listed in Section16.2and those that can be obtained
from these substituents by chemical conversion. However,the kinds of substituents

that can be placed on benzene rings can be greatly expanded by the use of

arenediazonium salts
.The drive to form a molecule of stable nitrogen gas causes the leaving group 
of a diazonium ion to be easily displaced by a wide variety of nucleophiles. The mecha-

nism by which a nucleophile displaces the diazonium group depends on the nucleophile:

Some displacements involve phenyl cations,while others involve radicals.
A primary amine can be converted into a diazonium salt by treatment with nitrous
acid Because nitrous acid is unstable,it is formed in situ,using an aqueous

solution of sodium nitrite and HCl or HBr; indeed,is such a good leaving group

that the diazonium salt is synthesized at 0¡C and used immediately without isolation.(The mechanism for conversion of a primary amino group to a diazonium

group is shown in Section16.12.)
Nucleophiles such as and will replace the diazonium group if
the appropriate cuprous salt is added to the solution containing the arenediazonium
salt. The reaction of an arenediazonium salt with a cuprous salt is known as a

Sandmeyer reaction
.BrCl,CN,NNH2NCl
NaNO2, HCl0 C[NN][NH2]N2(HNO2).NNNuClNuN2Clbenzenediazoniumchloride(N2)NNCl
an arenediazonium saltOHOH
SO3HSO
3HOHBrBrOHH2SO4100 CBr2H3O100 C3-D Molecule:Benzenediazonium chlorideBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 646
Section 16.10Synthesis of Substituted Benzenes Using Arenediazonium Salts
647KCl and KBr cannot be used in place of CuCl and CuBr in Sandmeyer reactions; the
cuprous salts are required. This indicates that the cuprous ion is involved in the reac-

tion,most likely by serving as a radical initiator (Section4.10).
Although chloro and bromo substituents can be placed directly on a benzene ringby halogenation,the Sandmeyer reaction can be a useful alternative. For example,if

you wanted to make 
para
-chloroethylbenzene,chlorination of ethylbenzene would
lead to a mixture of the ortho and para isomers.However,if you started with 
para
-ethylaniline and used a Sandmeyer reaction for
chlorination,only the desired para product would be formed.
PROBLEM 20Explain why a diazonium group on a benzene ring cannot be used to direct an incoming
substituent to the meta position.p-ethylanilinep-chloroethylbenzeneNaNO2, HCl0 CCH2CH3NH2CuClCH2CH3CH2CH3ClNNCl
FeCl3CH2CH3Cl2CH2CH3ClCH2CH3Clo-chloroethylbenzeneethylbenzenep-chloroethylbenzeneCuCNNCl
BrCNN2BrNm-bromobenzonitrilem-bromobenzenediazonium chlorideCuBrNNBr
BrN2CuClNNCl
ClCH3CH3N2Sandmeyer reactionsbenzenediazoniumbromidebromobenzenep-toluenediazoniumchloridep-chlorotolueneTraugott Sandmeyer (1854Ð1922)
was born in Switzerland. He received

a Ph.D. from the University of

Heidelberg and discovered the

reaction that bears his name in 1884.

He was a scientist at Geigy Co. in
Basel,Switzerland.
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 647
648CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesPROBLEM 21Explain why HBr should be used to generate the benzenediazonium salt if bromobenzene is
the desired product of the Sandmeyer reaction and HCl should be used if chlorobenzene

is the desired product.An iodo substituent will replace the diazonium group if potassium iodide is added
to the solution containing the diazonium ion.Fluoro substitution occurs if the arenediazonium salt is heated with fluoroboric acid
This reaction is known as the 
Schiemann reaction
.If the aqueous solution in which the diazonium salt has been synthesized is acidified
and heated,an OH group will replace the diazonium group. (is the nucleophile.)

This is a convenient way to synthesize a phenol.
Phenols can also be prepared at room temperature using cuprous oxide and aqueous
cupric nitrate.A hydrogen will replace a diazonium group if the diazonium salt is treated with
hypophosphorous acid This is a useful reaction if an amino group or a

nitro group is needed for directing purposes and subsequently must be removed. It

would be difficult to envision how 1,3,5-tribromobenzene could be synthesized

without such a reaction.(H3PO2).p-cresolNNCl
CH3Cu2OCu(NO3)2, H2OOHCH3N2NNCl
OHH3ON2HClphenolH2ONNCl
NNBF
4FHBF4N2BF3HClfluorobenzeneSchiemann reaction(HBF4).NNCl
ICH3KIN2CH3KClp-iodotoluenep-toluenediazoniumchloridewas born in Germany. He was a

professor of chemistry at the

Technologische Hochschule in

Hanover,Germany.
BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 648
PROBLEM 22Write the sequence of steps involved in the conversion of benzene into benzenediazonium
chloride.PROBLEM 23SOLVED
Show how the following compounds could be synthesized from benzene:
a.m-dibromobenzened.
m-nitrotolueneb.m-bromophenole.
p-methylbenzonitrilec.o-chlorophenolf.
m-chlorobenzaldehydeSOLUTION TO 23aA bromo substituent is an orthoÐpara director,so halogenation
cannot be used to introduce both bromo substituents of 
m-dibromobenzene. Knowing
that a bromo substituent can be placed on a benzene ring with a Sandmeyer reaction

and that the bromo substituent in a Sandmeyer reaction replaces what originally was 

a meta-directing nitro substituent,we have a route to the synthesis of the target

compound.16.11The Arenediazonium Ion as an Electrophile
In addition to being used to synthesize substituted benzenes,arenediazonium ions
can be used as electrophiles in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. Be-
cause an arenediazonium ion is unstable at room temperature,it can be used as an

electrophile only in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions that can be carried

out well below room temperature. In other words,only highly activated benzene

rings (phenols,anilines,and 
N-alkylanilines) can undergo electrophilic aromatic
substitution reactions with arenediazonium ion electrophiles. The product of the

reaction is an azo compound. The linkage is called an 
azo linkage. Becausethe electrophile is so large,substitution takes place preferentially at the less steri-

cally hindered para position.NNNO2NO2BrNH2BrBrNBrBr1. Sn/HCl2. HONaNO2  0 
C  HBr
HNO3H2SO4Br2CuBrFeBr3NBrSection 16.11The Arenediazonium Ion as an Electrophile
6493 Br2N2NH2NH2BrBrBrNBrBrBrBrBrBrNaNO2, HBrH
3PO20 CNBr
1,3,5-tribromobenzeneBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 649
650CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesHowever,if the para position is blocked,substitution will occur at an ortho position.
The mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitution with an arenediazonium ion
electrophile is the same as the mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitution with any

other electrophile.Azo compounds,like alkenes,can exist in cis and trans forms. Because of steric
strain,the trans isomer is considerably more stable than the cis isomer (Section4.11).
We have seen that azobenzenes are colored compounds because of their extended con-
jugation and are used commercially as dyes (Section8.12).
PROBLEM 24In the mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitution with a diazonium ion as the
electrophile,why does nucleophilic attack occur on the terminal nitrogen atom of the dia-

zonium ion rather than on the nitrogen atom bonded to the benzene ring?NNNNtrans-azobenzenecis-azobenzenep-methylphenolbenzenediazonium
chloride2-hydroxy-5-methylazobenzeneNOHCH3CH3OHNNNClNOHOHNNNClBrBran azo linkagephenolmeta-bromobenzenediazoniumchloride3-bromo-4'-hydroxyazobenzenean azo compound3-D Molecule:para-N,N-Dimethyl-aminoazobenzeneNN,N-dimethylanilinemechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitution using an arenediazonium ion electrophileN(CH3)2p-N,N-dimethylaminoazobenzeneNHBBNNN(CH3)2N(CH3)2HNNBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 650
Section 16.12Mechanism for the Reaction of Amines with Nitrous Acid
651PROBLEM 25Give the structure of the activated benzene ring and the diazonium ion used in the synthesis
of the following compounds:
a.butter yellowb.methyl orange
(The structures of these compounds can be found in Section8.12.)
16.12Mechanism for the Reactionof Amines with Nitrous Acid
We have seen that the reaction of a primary amine with nitrous acid produces a diazo-
nium salt. Both aryl amines and alkyl amines undergo this reaction,and both follow

the same mechanism.Conversion of a 
primaryamino group to a diazonium group requires a nitrosoniumion that is formed when water is eliminated from protonated nitrous acid.
The nitrosonium ion accepts a share of the amino nitrogen
Õs lone pair. Loss of a proton
from nitrogen forms a 
nitrosamine
(also called an N-nitroso compound
because anitroso substituent is bonded to a nitrogen). Delocalization of nitrogenÕs lone pair andprotonation of oxygen form a protonated 
N-hydroxyazo compound. This compound is
in equilibrium with its nonprotonated form,which can be reprotonated on nitrogen

(reverse reaction) or protonated on oxygen (forward reaction). Elimination of water

forms the diazonium ion.NNaNO2, HCl0 CNH2arylarylCl
NNNaNO2, HCl0 CNH2alkylalkylCl
NNONOH2OHOHNOHOClHClHNNaNaClOOnitrosoniumionnitrous acidsodium nitriteClNBan N-hydroxyazocompoundNOH
Na nitrosamineanilinea primary amineNHOH
BHNNOHBHNNOH
HNa diazoniumionNH2OBBHNHNHNONOHBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 651
652CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesRemember that reactions in which arenediazonium ions are involved must be carried
out at 0
¡C because they are unstable at higher temperatures. Alkanediazonium ions are
even less stable. They lose molecular 
Ñeven at 0
¡CÑas they are formed,reacting
with whatever nucleophiles are present in the reaction mixture by both and
mechanisms. Because of the mixture of products obtained,alkanediazonium
ions are of limited synthetic use.PROBLEM 26What products would be formed from the reaction of isopropylamine with sodium nitrite
and aqueous HCl?PROBLEM 27Diazomethane can be used to convert a carboxylic acid into a methyl ester. Propose a

mechanism for this reaction.Secondaryaryl and alkyl amines react with a nitrosonium ion to form nitrosamines
rather than diazonium ions. The mechanism of the reaction is similar to that for the reac-

tion of a primary amine with a nitrosonium ion,except that the reaction stops at the ni-

trosamine stage. The reaction stops because a secondary amine,unlike a primary amine,

does not have the second proton that must be lost in order to generate the diazonium ion.
The product formed when the nitrogen of a tertiaryamine shares its lone pair with anitrosonium ion cannot be stabilized by loss of a proton. A tertiary aryl amine,there-

fore,can undergo an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction with a nitrosonium

ion. The product of the reaction is primarily the para isomer because the bulky dialkyl-

amino group blocks approach of the nitrosonium ion to the ortho position.N,N-dimethylanilinea tertiary amine(CH3)2N(CH
3)2N(CH3)2NNOONOpara-nitroso-N,N-dimethylaniline85%NN-methyl-N-nitrosoanilinea nitrosamineN-methylanilinea secondary amineCH3NCH
3N+ONOCH3NNOHHNBHB
RCOHN2ORCOCH3OCH2N2a carboxylicacida methylesterdiazomethaneSN2E2SN1E1N23-D Molecule:N-Methyl-N-nitrosoaniline3-D Molecule:para-Nitroso-N,N-dimethyl-anilineBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 652
Section 16.13Nucleophilic Aromatic Substitution Reactions
653NITROSAMINES AND CANCERA 1962 outbreak of food poisoning in sheep in
Norway was traced to their ingestion of nitrite-
treated fish meal. This incident immediately raised concerns

about human consumption of nitrite-treated foods,because

sodium nitrite is a commonly used food preservative. It can

react with naturally occurring secondary amines present in
food,to produce nitrosamines,which are known to be car-

cinogenic. Smoked fish,cured meats,and beer all contain

nitrosamines. Nitrosamines are also found in cheese,which is

not surprising because some cheeses are preserved with nitrite

and cheese is rich in secondary amines. In the United States,

consumer groups asked the Food and Drug Administration to

ban the use of sodium nitrite as a preservative. This request

was vigorously opposed by the meat-packing industry. De-
spite extensive investigations,it has not been determined
whether the small amounts of nitrosamines present in our

food pose a hazard to our health. Until this question can be an-

swered,it will be hard to avoid sodium nitrite in our diet. It is

worrisome to note,however,that Japan has both one of the

highest gastric cancer rates and the highest average ingestion

of sodium nitrite. Some good news is that the concentration of

nitrosamines present in bacon has been considerably reduced

in recent years by adding ascorbic acid
Ña nitrosamine in-hibitorÑto the curing mixture. Also,improvements in the
malting process have reduced the level of nitrosamines in

beer. Dietary sodium nitrite does have a redeeming feature
Ñthere is some evidence that it protects against botulism (a type

of severe food poisoning).
16.13Nucleophilic Aromatic Substitution Reactions
We have seen that aryl halides do not react with nucleophiles under standard reac-
tion conditions because the electron clouds repel the approach of a nucleophile

(Section10.8).
If,however,the aryl halide has one or more substituents that strongly withdraw elec-
trons from the ring by resonance,
nucleophilic aromatic substitution
reactions canoccur without using extreme conditions. The electron-withdrawing groups must be

positioned ortho or para to the halogen. The greater the number of electron-with-

drawing substituents,the easier it is to carry out the nucleophilic aromatic substitu-

tion reaction. Notice the different conditions under which the following reactions

occur:O2NClNO2OHNO2H2O(pH 7), 40 CClNO2O2NNO
2ClNO2OHNO21.  HO(pH 14), 160 C2.  HNO2HClClNO2NO2OHNO2HO(pH 10), 100 CClno reactionClNup3-D Molecule:1-Chloro-2,4,6-
trinitrobenzeneBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 653
654CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesElectron-withdrawing substituents
increase the reactivity of the benzene

ring toward nucleophilic substitution

and decrease the reactivity of the

benzene ring toward electrophilic

substitution.Notice also that the strongly electron-withdrawing substituents that 
activatethebenzene ring toward 
nucleophilic aromatic substitution
reactions are the same sub-stituents that deactivatethe ring toward 
electrophilic aromatic substitution
. In otherwords,making the ring less electron rich makes it easier for a nucleophile
Ñbut more
difficult for an electrophile
Ñto approach the ring. Thus,any substituent that deacti-
vates the benzene ring toward electrophilic substitution activates it toward nucleo-

philic substitution and vice versa.
Nucleophilic aromatic substitution takes place by a two-step reaction known as an
reaction
(substitution nucleophilic aromatic). In the first step,the nucleophile
attacks the carbon bearing the leaving group from a trajectory that is nearly perpendic-

ular to the aromatic ring. (Recall from Section10.8that leaving groups cannot be

displaced from carbon atoms by back-side attack.) Nucleophilic attack forms a

resonance-stabilized carbanion intermediate called a Meisenheimer complex
,after
Jakob Meisenheimer (1876
Ð1934). In the second step of the reaction,the leaving
group departs,reestablishing the aromaticity of the ring.
In a nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction,the incoming nucleophile must be a
stronger base than the substituent that is being replaced,because the weaker of the two

bases will be the one eliminated from the intermediate.The electron-withdrawing substituent must be ortho or para to the site of nucleo-
philic attack because the electrons of the attacking nucleophile can be delocalized onto
the substituent only if the substituent is in one of those positions.A variety of substituents can be placed on a benzene ring by means of nucleophilic
aromatic substitution reactions. The only requirement is that the incoming group be a

stronger base than the group that is being replaced.ClN+HOCl+OOOONHOelectrons are delocalizedonto the NO2 groupsp2SNAr3-D Molecule:para-FluoronitrobenzeneXNO2NO2YNO2NXYYXNO2NOOOOslowgeneral mechanism for nucleophilic aromatic substitutionfastXYXYXYFNO2CH3OHOCH3CH2NH2H2OOCH3NO2FBrNO2NH2CH2CH3BrNO2NHCH2CH3NO2NO2p-fluoronitrobenzeneN-ethyl-2,4-dinitro-anilinep-nitroanisole1-bromo-2,4-dinitrobenzeneNO2NO2BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 654
Section 16.14Benzyne
655Martin D. Kamen (1913
Ð2002)wasborn in Toronto. He was the first to

isolate which immediately

became the most useful of all the
isotopes in chemical and biochemical

research. He received a B.S. and a

Ph.D. from the University of Chicago

and became a U.S. citizen in 1938.

He was a professor at the University

of California,Berkeley; at

Washington University,St. Louis; and

at Brandeis University. He was one

of the founding professors of the

University of California,San Diego.

In later years,he became a member

of the faculty at the University of

Southern California. He received the

Fermi medal in 1996.
14C,The labeling experiment was done by
John D. Roberts
,who was born inLos Angeles in 1918. He received

both his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees from

UCLA. He arrived at the California
Institute of Technology in 1952 as a

Guggenheim fellow and has been a

professor there since 1953.
PROBLEM 28Draw resonance contributors for the carbanion that would be formed if 
meta-chloro-nitrobenzene could react with hydroxide ion. Why doesn
Õt it react?PROBLEM 29a.List the following compounds in order of decreasing reactivity toward nucleophilic
aromatic substitution:chlorobenzene1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene
p-chloronitrobenzeneb.List the same compounds in order of decreasing reactivity toward electrophilic aromatic
substitution.PROBLEM 30Show how each of the following compounds could be synthesized from benzene:
a.o-nitrophenolb.
p-nitroanilinec.
p-bromoanisole16.14BenzyneAn aryl halide such as chlorobenzene can undergo a nucleophilic substitution reac-
tion in the presence of a very strong base such as There are two surprising

features about this reaction:The aryl halide does not have to contain an electron-

withdrawing group,and the incoming substituent does not always end up on the car-

bon vacated by the leaving group. For example,when chlorobenzene
Ñwith the
carbon to which the chlorine is attached isotopically labeled with 
Ñis treatedwith amide ion in liquid ammonia,aniline is obtained as the product. Half of the

product has the amino group attached to the isotopically labeled carbon (denoted by

the asterisk) as expected,but the other half has the amino group attached to the car-

bon adjacent to the labeled carbon.These are the only products formed. Anilines with the amino group two or three car-
bons removed from the labeled carbon are not formed.
The fact that the two products are formed in approximately equal amounts indicates
that the reaction takes place by a mechanism that forms an intermediate in which the

two carbons to which the amino group is attached in the product are equivalent. The

mechanism that accounts for the experimental observations involves the formation of

a benzyne intermediate. Benzyne has a triple bond between two adjacent carbon
atoms of benzene. In the first step of the mechanism,the strong base removes

a proton from the position ortho to the halogen. The resulting anion expels the halide

ion,thereby forming benzyne.
ClNH2HClNH3Cl***benzyne(NH2)NH2***ClNH3(liq)approximately equal amounts ofthe two products are obtainedNH2NH2chlorobenzene14CNH2.BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 655
656CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenesa.RCCRb.poor overlapgood overlapFigure 16.4
Orbital pictures of the bond formed(a)by overlapping 
porbitals in anormal triple bond and (b)by

overlapping orbitals in the

distorted Òtriple bondÓ in benzyne.sp2The incoming nucleophile can attack either of the carbons of the Òtriple bond
Óofbenzyne. Protonation of the resulting anion forms the substitution product. The overall

reaction is an eliminationÐaddition reaction:Benzyne is formed in an elimination
reaction and immediately undergoes an addition reaction.
Substitution at the carbon that was attached to the leaving group is called 
direct
substitution. Substitution at the adjacent carbon is called 
cine substitution(cine comesfrom kinesis,which is Greek for 
Òmovement
Ó). In the following reaction,
o-toluidine isthe direct-substitution product; m-toluidine is the cine-substitution product.Benzyne is an extremely reactive species. In Section6.3,we saw that in a molecule
with a triple bond,the two 
sphybridized carbons and the atoms attached to these car-bons are linear because the bond angles are 180
¡. Four linear atoms
cannot be incorporated into a six-membered ring,so the system in

benzyne is distorted:The original bond is unchanged,but the orbitals that form

the new bond are not parallel to one another (Figure16.4). Therefore,they cannot

overlap as well as the 
porbitals that form a normal bond,resulting in a much weak-
er and much more reactive bond.
psp2pCCCC(CCCC)NH2NH2HNH
2NH2NH2NH2NH2HNH
2NH2benzyne*****3-D Molecule:BenzyneNH2CH3BrNH2o-bromotolueneNaNH2m-toluidinecine-substitution producto-toluidinedirect-substitution productNH3(liq)CH3CH3Although benzyne is too unstable to be isolated,evidence that it is formed can be
obtained by a trapping experiment. When furan is added to a reaction that forms a ben-

zyne intermediate,furan traps the benzyne intermediate by reacting with it in a

DielsÐAlder reaction (Section8.8). The product of the Diels
ÐAlder reaction can beisolated.BrOOthe product of theDielsÐAlder reactionNH2benzynea dienophilefurana dieneNH3(liq)BRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 656
Section 16.16Electrophilic Substitution Reactions of Naphthalene and Substituted Naphthalenes
657A synthesis employing a benzyne intermediate is a good way to prepare 
meta-amino-substituted aryl ethers (see Problem 31). The amide ion preferentially attacks the meta

position because there is less steric hindrance at this position and the resulting negative

charge can be stabilized by the adjacent electron-withdrawing oxygen atom.
PROBLEM 31Starting with benzene,show how 
meta-aminoanisole could be prepared via a synthesis thata.involves a benzyne intermediateb.does not involve a benzyne intermediate
PROBLEM 32Give the products that would be obtained from the reaction of the following compounds
with sodium amide in liquid ammonia:a.b.c.d.
16.15Polycyclic Benzenoid Hydrocarbons
Polycyclic benzenoid hydrocarbons are compounds that contain two or more fused
benzene rings. Fused ringsshare two adjacent carbons
Ñnaphthalene has two fused
rings,anthracene and phenanthrene have three fused rings,and tetracene,triphenyl-

ene,pyrene,and chrysene have four fused rings. There are many polycyclic benzenoid

hydrocarbons with more than four fused rings.Like benzene,all the larger polycyclic benzenoid hydrocarbons undergo elec-
trophilic substitution reactions. Some of these compounds are well-known carcino-

gens. The chemical reactions responsible for causing cancer and how you can predict

which compounds are carcinogenic were discussed in Section12.8.
16.16Electrophilic Substitution Reactions of
Naphthalene and Substituted NaphthalenesLike benzene,naphthalene is an aromatic hydrocarbon. Naphthalene has three reso-
nance contributors.
resonance contributors of naphthaleneanthracenephenanthrene
naphthalenetriphenylenepyrenechrysene
tetraceneOHBrBrCH3CH3CH2CH3BrCH3ClBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 657
658CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesAlso like benzene,naphthalene undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution reac-
tions. Substitution occurs preferentially at the 1-position. In common nomenclature,

the 1-position is called the and the 2-position is called the 
Naphthaleneis more reactive than benzene toward electrophilic substitution be-
cause the carbocation intermediate is more stable and,therefore,easier to form than

the analogous carbocation intermediate formed from benzene. Because of naphtha-

leneÕs increased reactivity,a Lewis acid is not needed for bromination or chlorination.
PROBLEM 33Use the resonance contributors of naphthalene to predict whether all the carbon
Ðcarbonbonds have the same length,as they do in benzene.
PROBLEM 34Draw the resonance contributors for the carbocation intermediates obtained from elec-

trophilic aromatic substitution at the 1-position and the 2-position of naphthalene. Use the
resonance contributors to explain why substitution at the 1-position is preferred.
Sulfonation of naphthalene does not always lead to substitution at the 1-position. If
the reaction is carried out under conditions which cause it to be irreversible (80
¡C),substitution occurs at the 1-position.If,however,the reaction is carried out under conditions which cause it to be readily
reversible (160
¡C),substitution occurs predominantly at the 2-position.
Thisis another example of a reaction whose product composition depends on whether
the conditions used in the experiment cause the reaction to be irreversible (under kinetic

control) or reversible (under thermodynamic control). (See Section8.7.) The 1-substi-

tuted product is the kinetic product because it is easier to form. It is the predominant

product,therefore,when the reaction is carried out under conditions that cause it to be
SO3Hnaphthalene-2-sulfonic acidthermodynamic productH2SO4160 Cnaphthalene-1-sulfonic acidkinetic productSO3Hnaphthalene-1-sulfonic acidH2SO4H2OSO3H80 C1-bromonaphthaleneBr2HBrBrH2SO4HNO3H2ONO21-nitronaphthalene-nitronaphthalene18452367b-position.a-position3-D Molecule:Naphthalene3-D Molecules:Naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid;
Naphthalene-2-sulfonic acidBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 658
Section 16.16Electrophilic Substitution Reactions of Naphthalene and Substituted Naphthalenes
659irreversible (mild reaction conditions). The 2-substituted product is the thermodynamic
product because it is more stable. It is the predominant product when the reaction is

carried out under conditions that cause it to be reversible (higher temperatures).
The 1-substituted product is easier to form because the carbocation leading to its
formation is more stable. The 2-substituted product is more stable because there is

more room for the bulky sulfonic acid group at the 2-position. In the 1-substituted

product,the sulfonic acid group is too close to the hydrogen at the 8-position.
In the case of substituted naphthalenes,the nature of the substituent determines
which ring will undergo electrophilic substitution. If the substituent is deactivating,

the electrophile will attack the 1-position of the ring that lacks the deactivating sub-

stituent,because that ring is more reactive than the ring that contains the deactivating

substituent.If the substituent is activating,the electrophile will attack the ring that contains the sub-
stituent. The incoming electrophile will be directed to a 1-position that is ortho or para to

the substituent,because all activating substituents are ortho
Ðpara directors (Section16.4).
PROBLEM 35Givethe products that would be obtained from the reaction of the following compounds
with a.c.
b.d.
NO2BrCH3OCH3Cl2 :CH3CH3CH3CClHCl
1. AlCl3OCH3OCH3CH3COBr2HBrBrO2. H2OHNO3H2SO4NO2NO2NO2HSO3HHSO3HHan unfavorablesteric interaction1-Substituted naphthalenes are easier to
form; 2-substituted naphthalenes are

more stable.
Tutorial:
Terms for the reactions of

substituted benzenesBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 659
660CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted BenzenesSummaryBenzene rings with substituents other than halo,nitro,sulfonic
acid,alkyl,and acyl can be prepared by first synthesizing one

of these substituted benzenes and then chemically changing
the substituent. The kinds of substituents that can be placed on

benzene rings are greatly expanded by reactions of arene dia-

zonium salts,nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions,and

reactions involving a benzyne intermediate. The relative posi-

tions of two substituents on a benzene ring are indicated either

by numbers or by the prefixes 
ortho,meta,and 
para
.The nature of the substituent affects both the reactivity
of the benzene ring and the placement of an incoming sub-

stituent:The rate of electrophilic aromatic substitution is

increased by electron-donating substituents and decreased

by electron-withdrawing substituents. Substituents can do-

nate or withdraw electrons 
inductively
or byresonance
.The stability of the carbocation intermediate determines
to which position a substituent directs an incoming elec-

trophile. All activating substituents and the weakly deacti-

vating halogens are 
orthoÐpara directors
; all substituentsmore deactivating than the halogens are 
meta directors
.OrthoÐpara directorsÑwith the exception of alkyl,aryl,
and Ñhave a lone pair on the atom attached to
the ring; meta directors have a positive or partial positive

charge on the atom attached to the ring. Ortho
Ðpara-direct-ing substituents form the para isomer preferentially if either

the substituent or the incoming electrophile is large.
In synthesizing disubstituted benzenes,the order in which
the substituents are placed on the ring and the point in a reac-

tion sequence at which a substituent is chemically modified

are important considerations. When a disubstituted benzene

undergoes an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction,the

directing effect of both substituents has to be considered.
RO- and HO-substituted benzenes are halogenated without
the Lewis acid. Benzene rings with meta-directing substituents

cannot undergo Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions. Aniline and 
N-substi-tuted anilines also cannot undergo Friedel
ÐCrafts reactions.CHCHRAniline and substituted-anilines react with nitrous acid toform arenediazonium salts
; a diazonium group can be dis-
placed by a nucleophile. Arenediazonium ions can be used as

electrophiles with highly activated benzene rings to form 
azocompoundsthat can exist in cis and trans forms. Secondary
amines react with nitrous acid to form nitrosamines
.An aryl halide with one or more substituents ortho or
para to the leaving group that strongly withdraw electrons

by resonance undergoes a 
nucleophilic aromatic substitu-
tionreaction:The nucleophile forms a resonance-
stabilized carbanion intermediate,and then the leaving

group departs,reestablishing the aromaticity of the ring.

The incoming nucleophile must be a stronger base than the
substituent being replaced. A substituent that deactivates a

benzene ring toward electrophilic substitution activates it

toward nucleophilic substitution.
In the presence of a strong base,an aryl halide undergoes
a nucleophilic substitution reaction via a benzyne interme-diate. After a hydrogen halide is eliminated,the nucleo-
phile can attack either of the carbons of the distorted ÒtriplebondÓin benzyne. 
Direct substitution
is substitution at thecarbon that was attached to the leaving group; 
cine substi-tutionis substitution at the adjacent carbon.The ability of a substituent to withdraw electrons from or
donate electrons into a benzene ring is reflected in the 

values of substituted phenols,benzoic acids,and protonated

anilines:Electron withdrawal increases acidity; electron

donation decreases acidity.
Polycyclic benzenoid hydrocarbons contain two or more
fused benzene rings; fused ringsshare two adjacent carbons.
Polycyclic benzenoid hydrocarbons undergo electrophilic

aromatic substitution reactions. Naphthalene undergoes irre-

versible substitution predominantly at the 1-position and 

reversible substitution predominantly at the 2-position. The

nature of the substituent determines which ring of a substi-

tuted-naphthalene undergoes electrophilic substitution.
pa(SNAr)Summary of Reactions1.Reactions of substituents on a benzene ring (Section16.2)
Sn, HClNH3ClNO2HONH2Na2Cr2O7, HCOOHCH3NBS, peroxideCH2BrZCH2Z CH3Z  a nucleophileBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:54 PM  Page 660
Summary of Reactions6612.Reactions of amines with nitrous acid (Section16.12)
3.Replacement of a diazonium group (Section16.10)
ClNNOHN2Cu2OCu(NO3)2, H2OClNNN2H3PO2HClNNOHHClN2H3OClNNBF3FN2HBF4ClNNN2IKIClNNNN2CNCuCClNNCuClN2ClBrNNCuBrN2BrONNaNO2, HCl0 C(CH3)2N(CH3)2Ntertiary amineNaNO2, HCl0 CNH2ClNNprimary amineNaNO2, HCl0 CCH3NHCH3NNO
secondary amineBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 661
662CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenes4.Formation of an azo compound (Section16.11)
5.Nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions (Section16.13)
6.Nucleophilic substitution via a benzyne intermediate (Section16.14)
7.Electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions of naphthalene (Section16.16)
CH3CH3CH3CClHCl
1. AlCl3OCH3OCH3CH3COBr2HBrBrO2. H2OCH3NH3 (liq) NH2BrNH2CH3Br direct-substitutionproductcine-substitutionproductCH3NH2NO2NO2ClNO2NH3Cl NO2NH3H2ONO2NH2NO2HOCH3OBrBrNO2NO2OCH3OHCl
HONN
NNKey Terms
activating substituent (p.631)
arenediazonium salt (p.646)

azo linkage (p.649)

benzyne intermediate (p.655)

cine substitution (p.656)

deactivating substituent (p.631)

direct substitution (p.656)

donate electrons by resonance (p.630)
fused rings (p.657)
inductive electron donation (p.630)

inductive electron withdrawal (p.630)

meta director (p.635)

nitrosamine (p.651)

N-nitroso compound (p.651)
nucleophilic aromatic substitution(p.653)
orthoÐpara director (p.635)
resonance electron donation (p.630)

resonance electron withdrawal (p.630)

Sandmeyer reaction (p.646)

Schiemann reaction (p.648)
reaction (p.654)
withdraw electrons by resonance (p.631)
SNArBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 662
Problems663Problems
36.Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.m-ethylphenold.
o-bromoanilineg.
o-nitroanisoleb.p-nitrobenzenesulfonic acide.2-chloroanthraceneh.2,4-dichlorotoluene
c.(
E)-2-phenyl-2-pentenef.
m-chlorostyrene37.Name the following compounds:
a.c.e.g.
i.b.d.f.h.
38.Provide the necessary reagents next to the arrows.
OBrClNO
2NH2NNNCHCH2CH2BrCH2CH2OHCH2HOCHCH3COOHSO3HBrCHCH3CH2CH3FClBrIC
CH2NH2OHCCH3CH2CH3CH3SO3HClClCHCH
2NO2BrBr
BrClCH2CH3NNCH3BrOCH3CH2CH3OHCH3H3CCOOHBrBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 663
664CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenes39.The values of a few ortho-,meta-,and para-substituted benzoic acids are shown here:
The relative values depend on the substituent. For chloro-substituted benzoic acids,the ortho isomer is the most acidic and the
para isomer is the least acidic; for nitro-substituted benzoic acids,the ortho isomer is the most acidic and the meta isomer is
 theleast acidic; and for amino-substituted benzoic acids,the meta isomer is the most acidic and the ortho isomer is the least acid
ic.Explain these relative acidities.
40.Give the product(s) of each of the following reactions:
a.e.
b.f.

c.followed by g.

d.h.
41.Rank the following anions in order of decreasing basicity:
42.The compound with the following NMR spectrum is known to be highly reactive toward electrophilic aromatic substitution.
Identify the compound.43.Show how the following compounds could be synthesized from benzene:
a.m-chlorobenzenesulfonic acidd.
m-bromobenzonitrileg.
m-bromobenzoic acidb.m-chloroethylbenzenee.1-phenylpentaneh.
p-cresolc.benzyl alcoholf.
m-hydroxybenzoic acid44.For each of the groups of substituted benzenes,indicate
a.the one that would be the most reactive in an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction
4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency1HOCH3OCH3OOCH3COBrO-xyleneNa2Cr2O7H-methylanilinebenzenediazonium chlorideethylbenzeneBr2FeBr3H2Onaphthaleneacetyl chlorideAlCl3phenolH2SO4isopropylbenzenecyclohexeneHFcyclohexyl phenyl etherBr2FeBr3benzoic acidHNO3H2SO4 NH
2 metaparaortho NO
2 orthoparameta Cl
 orthometaparapaNH2COOHCOOH
NH2COOHNH2pKa  4.95p
Ka  4.73p
Ka  4.89COOHClNO
2COOHCOOHClCOOHClCOOHNO2pKa  2.94p
Ka  2.17pKa  3.83p
Ka  3.99COOHNO2pKa  3.44pKa  3.49paBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 664
b.the one that would be the least reactive in an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction
c.the one that would yield the highest percentage of meta product
45.Arrange the following groups of compounds in order of decreasing reactivity toward electrophilic aromatic substitution:
a.benzene,ethylbenzene,chlorobenzene,nitrobenzene,anisole

b.1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene,2,4-dinitrophenol,2,4-dinitrotoluene

c.toluene,
p-cresol,benzene,
p-xylened.benzene,benzoic acid,phenol,propylbenzene

e.p-nitrotoluene,2-chloro-4-nitrotoluene,2,4-dinitrotoluene,
p-chlorotoluenef.bromobenzene,chlorobenzene,fluorobenzene,iodobenzene
46.Give the products of the following reactions:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
47.For each of the statements in Column I,choose a substituent from Column II that fits the description for the compound at the
 right:Column IColumn II
a.Z donates electrons inductively,but does not donateOH
or withdraw electrons by resonance.Br
b.Z withdraws electrons inductively and withdraws
electrons by resonance.c.Z deactivates the ring and directs ortho
Ðpara.d.Z withdraws electrons inductively,donates electrons
by resonance,and activates the ring.
e.Z withdraws electrons inductively,but does not
donate or withdraw electrons by resonance.
48.For each of the following compounds,indicate the ring carbon that would be nitrated if the compound were treated with 
a.b.c.d.
OHCOOHOCH3ClNHCCH3ONO2COOHHNO3H2SO4 :NO2CH2CH3NH3FeCl3CF3Cl2NBr21.  Mg/Et2O2.  D2OCH3Br1.  NBS//peroxide2.  Mg/Et2O3.  ethylene oxide4.  HCH3OCH3O1. AlCl32. H2OOOHNO3H2SO4OCCH3OOCH2CH3CH2OCH3COCH3ON(CH3)3CH2N(CH3)3CH2CH2N(CH3)3CH3CHF2CF3Problems665ZBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 665
666CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenese.g.i.k.
f.h.j.l.
49.Show how the following compounds could be synthesized from benzene:
a.N,N,N-trimethylanilinium iodided.2-methyl-4-nitrophenolg.
p-dideuteriobenzeneb.benzyl methyl ethere.
p-nitroanilineh.
p-nitro-N-methylanilinec.p-benzylchlorobenzenef.
m-bromoiodobenzene50.Which of the following compounds will react with HBr more rapidly?
51.Give the product(s) obtained from the reaction of each of the following compounds with 
a.c.
b.d.
52.Which would react more rapidly with 
m-xylene or p-xylene? Explain.53.What products would be obtained from the reaction of the following compounds with 
a.b.c.
54.A student had prepared three ethyl-substituted benzaldehydes,but had neglected to label them. The premed student at the next
bench said that they could be identified by brominating a sample of each and determining how many bromo-substituted products

were formed. Is the premed studentÕs advice sound?55.Explain,using resonance contributors for the intermediate carbocation,why a phenyl group is an ortho
Ðpara director.
ClCl2biphenylClFeCl3CH3C(CH3)3CH2CH2CH2CH3CHCH3CH3CH2CH3CH3Na2Cr2O7H?Cl2FeCl3,CH3ONO2OCOCCOCH
3H3COOCH2OBr2FeBr3 :CHCH
2orCH3CHCH
2CH3OSO3HOHClClOCCH3OCH3OCOCH3NO2OHCH3CH3NO2CCH3BrOBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 666
Problems66756.When heated with an acidic solution of sodium dichromate,compound A forms benzoic acid. Identify compound A from its
NMR spectrum.57.Describe two synthetic routes for the preparation of 
p-methoxyaniline with benzene as the starting material.58.Which is a more stable intermediate?
a.b.
59.If phenol is allowed to sit in that contains a small amount of what products would be formed?
60.Show how the following compounds could be prepared from benzene:
a.b.c.
61.An unknown compound reacts with ethyl chloride and aluminum trichloride to form a compound that has the following NMR
spectrum. Give the structure of the compound.
4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency1HCH3COSO3HCH2CH(CH3)2OCH3BrNO2CH3CH3CCH
2D2SO4,D2ONO2ClClHONO2OHorOHNO2HNO2HCH3or87653210
4(ppm)frequency1.31.21.1PPM
1HBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 667
668CHAPTER 16R
eactions of Substituted Benzenes62.How could you distinguish among the following compounds,using
a.their infrared spectra?
b.their NMR spectra?
63.The following tertiary alkyl bromides undergo an reaction in aqueous acetone to form the corresponding tertiary alcohols. Li
stthe alkyl bromides in order of decreasing reactivity.
64.p-Fluoronitrobenzene is more reactive than 
p-chloronitrobenzene toward hydroxide ion. What does this tell you about the rate-
determining step for nucleophilic aromatic substitution?65.a.Explain why the following reaction leads to the products shown:
b.What product would be obtained from the following reaction?
66.Describe how mescaline could be synthesized from benzene. The structure of mescaline is given on p.622.
67.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction that explains why the configuration of the asymmetric carbon in the reactant 
isretained in the product:68.Explain why hydroxide ion catalyzes the reaction of piperidine with 2,4-dinitroanisole,but has no effect on the reaction of
piperidine with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene.NHpiperidineOOOHHNH2COOCOOCNaNO2HClOCCH2CH2CCH
3NaNO2HClOHCNH2CH3CH3CH3NaNO2HClCH3CHCH2NH2CH3CCH3CH3CCH
2CH3CH3OHCH3ABCDE
CH3CCH3BrCH3CCH3BrCH3CCH3BrCH3CCH3CH2CH2CH3OCH2CH3SO3HOCCH
3OCH3CCH3BrClCHCH3BrSN1CCH3OCOCH3OCHOCOHOCH2OCH3CH2OHCH2OHABCDEFG
1HBRUI16-622_668r3  27-03-2003  3:55 PM  Page 668
669The three chapters
in Part Six focus on
the reactions of compounds that contain a
carbonyl group. Carbonyl compounds can

be placed in one of two classes:those that

contain a group that can be replaced by an-

other group (Class I) and those that do notcontain a group that can be replaced by an-

other group (Class II).Class I carbonyl compounds undergo 
nucleophilic acylsubstitutionreactions. These reactions are discussed in
Chapter 17,where you will see that all Class I carbonyl
compounds react with nucleophiles in the same wayÑ

they form an unstable tetrahedral intermediate that col-

lapses by eliminating the weakest base. So all you need to

know to determine the product of a reactionÑor even

whether a reaction will occurÑis the relative basicity of

the groups in the tetrahedral intermediate.The first part of 
Chapter 18compares Class I and ClassII carbonyl compounds by discussing their reactions with

good nucleophilesÑcarbon nucleophiles and hydride
ion. You will see that while Class I carbonyl compounds

undergo 
nucleophilic acyl substitutionreactions withthese nucleophiles,Class II carbonyl compounds undergo

nucleophilic acyl additionreactions. The chapter goes on
to discuss the reactions of Class II carbonyl compounds

with poorer nucleophilesÑnitrogen and oxygen nucle-

ophiles. You will see that Class II carbonyl compounds

undergo 
nucleophilic additionÐeliminationreactions withthese nucleophiles,forming unstable tetrahedral interme-

diates that preferentially eliminate the weakest base. In

other words,what you learned about the partitioning of

tetrahedral intermediates formed by Class I carbonyl

compounds is revisited with Class II carbonyl com-

pounds. The reactions of Class I and

Class II carbonyl compounds is also discussed.
Many carbonyl compounds have two sites of reactivity:
the carbonyl group 
andthe Chapter 17 and
Chapter 18 discuss the reactions of carbonyl compounds

that take place at the carbonyl group. 
Chapter 19exam-
ines the reactions of carbonyl compounds that take place

at the You have seen a variety of redox reactions in previous
chapters. Chapter 20introduces you to more redox re-
actions. Chapter 21extends the coverage of amines that
has been presented in earlier chapters and discusses the
chemistry of heterocyclic compounds
a-carbon.a-carbon.a,b-unsaturatedCarbonylCompoundsand AminesPARTSIX
Chapter 17Carbonyl Compounds I:Nucleophilic Acyl SubstitutionChapter 18Carbonyl Compounds II:Nucleophilic Acyl Addition,Nucleophilic Acyl Substitution,and Nucleophilic AdditionÐElimination ¥ Reactions of-Unsaturated CarbonylCompoundsChapter 19Carbonyl Compounds III:Reactions at the -Carbon
Chapter 20More About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsChapter 21More About Amines ¥Heterocyclic Compoundsaa,bBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 669
Penicillin GThe carbonyl group
Ñacarbon double bonded to
an oxygenÑis probably the
most important functional group found

in organic compounds. Compounds containing

carbonyl groups
Ñ called 
carbonyl compounds
Ñare abundant in nature. Many play important roles in

biological processes. Hormones,vitamins,amino acids,drugs,and flavorings are just

a few of the carbonyl compounds that affect us daily. An 
acyl group
consists of a car-bonyl group attached to an alkyl group or to an aryl group.
The substituents attached to the acyl group strongly affect the reactivity of carbonyl
compounds. Carbonyl compounds can be divided into two classes. Class I carbonyl

compounds are those in which the acyl group is attached to an atom or a group that 
canbe replaced by another group. Carboxylic acids,acyl halides,acid anhydrides,esters,

and amides belong to this class. All of these compounds contain a group 
or that can be replaced
by a nucleophile. Acyl halides,acid anhydrides,esters,and amides are all called

carboxylic acid derivatives
because they differ from a carboxylic acid only in the na-
ture of the group that has replaced the OH group of the carboxylic acid.OHa carboxylic acidan acid anhydride
OORRan esterCROCROCROCOcompounds with groups that can be replaced by a nucleophileNR2)NHR,NH2,OR,O(CO)R,Br,Cl,(OH,acyl groupsa carbonyl groupRCOArCOCO67017Carbonyl Compounds INucleophilic Acyl Substitutionan acyl chloridean estera carboxylic acidan amideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 670
Section 17.1Nomenclature
671Class II carbonyl compounds are those in which the acyl group is attached to a
group that cannotbe readily replaced by another group. Aldehydes and ketones belong
to this class. The and alkyl or aryl or groups of aldehydes and ke-

tones cannot be replaced by a nucleophile.In Chapter10,we saw that the likelihood of a group
Õs being replaced by another group
depends on the relative basicities of the two groups:
The weaker the basicity of a group,
the better its leaving ability. Recall from Section10.3that weak bases are good leaving
groups because weak bases do not share their electrons as well as strong bases do.The values of the conjugate acids of the leaving groups of various carbonyl
compounds are listed in Table17.1. Notice that the acyl groups of Class I carbonyl com-

pounds are attached to weaker bases than are the acyl groups of Class II carbonyl

compounds. (Remember that the lower the the stronger the acid and the weaker its

conjugate base.) The of an aldehyde and the alkyl or aryl or group of

a ketone are too basic to be replaced by another group.
This chapter discusses the reactions of ClassI carbonyl compounds. We will see
that these compounds undergo substitution reactions because they have an acyl group

attached to a group that can be replaced by a nucleophile. The reactions of aldehydes

and ketones will be considered in Chapter18. Because aldehydes and ketones have an

acyl group attached to a group that 
cannotbe replaced by a nucleophile,we can cor-
rectly predict that these compounds do notundergo substitution reactions.
17.1Nomenclature
Carboxylic AcidsIn systematic nomenclature,a 
carboxylic acidis named by replacing the terminal ÒeÓof the alkane name with Òoic acid.ÓFor example,the one-carbon alkane is methan
e,so
the one-carbon carboxylic acid is methanoic acid.Ar)(RHpa,paan aldehydeHa ketoneRCROCROcannot be replaced by a nucleophileAr)(RHan acyl chloridean acyl bromide
acyl halidesNH2amidesNHRNR2ClCROBrCROCROCROCROCOHHOCOHCH3CH2CH2CH2OCOHCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OCOHOCOHCH3OCOHCH3CH2OCOHCH3CH2CH2OCOHOCHCH2methanoic acidformic acidpropenoic acidacrylic acidbenzenecarboxylic acidbenzoic acidethanoic acidacetic acidpropanoic acidpropionic acidbutanoic acidbutyric acidpentanoic acidvaleric acidhexanoic acidcaproic acidsystematic name:common name:compounds with groups that can be replaced by a nucleophileBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 671
672CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds ICarboxylic acids containing six or fewer carbons are frequently called by their com-
mon names. These names were chosen by early chemists to describe some feature of

the compound,usually its origin. For example,formic acid is found in ants,bees,and

other stinging insects; its name comes from formica,which is Latin for 
Òant.ÓAceticacidÑcontained in vinegar
Ñgot its name from acetum,the Latin word for 
Òvinegar.
ÓPropionic acid is the smallest acid that shows some of the characteristics of the larger

fatty acids; its name comes from the Greek words 
pro
(Òthe first
Ó) and pion(Òfat
Ó). Bu-
tyric acid is found in rancid butter; the Latin word for 
Òbutter
Óis butyrum
. Caproic acidis found in goat
Õs milk,and if you have the occasion to smell both a goat and caproic
acid,you will find that they have similar odors. 
Caperis the Latin word for 
Ògoat.ÓIn systematic nomenclature,the position of a substituent is designated by a number.
The carbonyl carbon of a carboxylic acid is always the C-1 carbon. In common nomen-

clature,the position of a substituent is designated by a lowercase Greek letter,and the

carbonyl carbon is not given a designation. The carbon adjacent to the carbonyl carbon is

the ,the carbon adjacent to the is the and so on.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2COCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH123456systematic nomenclaturecommon nomenclatureCOOHb-carbon,a-carbonA-carbonepsilonDdeltaGgammaBbetaAalphaHROHOHRCOOCROORORRCClClORCBrBrORCNH2NH2H2RHH2OROHHClHBrNH3~40~5015.7~3Ð5~15Ð167936OClass IIClass ICarbonylcompoundLeavinggroupConjugate acid ofthe leaving groupp
KaRCHORCRORCORCOCROH
OOCROTable 17.1The p
Ka Values of the Conjugate Acids of the Leaving Groups of
Carbonyl CompoundsBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 672
Section 17.1Nomenclature
673Take a careful look at the following examples to make sure that you understand the
difference between systematic (IUPAC) and common nomenclature:
The functional group of a carboxylic acid is called a carboxyl group
.Carboxylic acids in which a carboxyl group is attached to a ring are named by adding
Òcarboxylic acidÓto the name of the cyclic compound.
Acyl HalidesAcyl halidesarecompounds that have a halogen atom in place of the OH group of a
carboxylic acid. The most common acyl halides are acyl chlorides and acyl bromides.

Acyl halides are named by using the acid name and replacing 
Òic acidÓwith Òyl chlo-rideÓ(or Òyl bromideÓ). For acids ending with 
Òcarboxylic acid,ÓÒcarboxylic acidÓisreplaced with Òcarbonyl chloride
Ó(or ÒbromideÓ).Acid AnhydridesLoss of water from two molecules of a carboxylic acid results in an 
acid anhydride
.ÒAnhydrideÓmeans Òwithout water.
ÓIf the two carboxylic acid molecules forming the acid anhydride are the same,the
anhydride is a symmetrical anhydride
. If the two carboxylic acid molecules are differ-
ent,the anhydride is a 
mixed anhydride
. Symmetrical anhydrides are named by using
the acid name and replacing ÒacidÓwith Òanhydride.ÓMixed anhydrides are named by
stating the names of both acids in alphabetical order,followed by 
Òanhydride.ÓROH
COan acid anhydrideRHOCOORRCOCOa carboxyl groupCOHOCOOHCO2Hcarboxyl groups are frequentlyshown in abbreviated forms3-D Molecules:trans-3-Methylcyclo-pentanecarboxylic acid;
Acetic anhydrideCH3CH2CHOH
OOHOCH3O2-methoxybutanoic acid-methoxybutyric acidCH3CH2CHCH2BrOHOCH3CH2CHCH2CH2Cl3-bromopentanoic acid-bromovaleric acid4-chlorohexanoic acid-chlorocaproic acidsystematic name:common name:CCCtrans-3-methylcyclopentanecarboxylicacid1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic acidCH3COOHCOOHCOOHCOOHOCOHcyclohexanecarboxylic acidCH3ethanoyl chlorideacetyl chloridecyclopentanecarbonylchlorideCH3CH2CHCH2CH33-methylpentanoyl bromide-methylvaleryl bromideCOsystematic name:common name:ClCOBrCOClBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 673
674CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IEstersAn esteris a compound that has an group in place of the OH group of a carboxylic
acid. In naming an ester,the name of the group attached to the 
carboxyl oxygen
isstated first,followed by the name of the acid,with 
Òic acidÓreplaced by Òate.ÓSalts of carboxylic acids are named in the same way. The cation is named first,followed
by the name of the acid,again with 
Òic acidÓreplaced by Òate.ÓCyclic esters are called 
lactones. In systematic nomenclature,they are named as 
Ò2-oxacycloalkanones.
ÓTheir common names are derived from the common name of the
carboxylic acid,which designates the length of the carbon chain,and a Greek letter to

indicate the carbon to which the carboxyl oxygen is attached. Thus,four-membered ring

lactones are (the carboxyl oxygen is on the ),five-membered 

ring lactones are and six-membered ring lactones are 
PROBLEM 1The word 
ÒlactoneÓhas its origin in lactic acid,a three-carbon carboxylic acid with an OH
group on the Ironically,lactic acid cannot form a lactone. Why not?
a-carbon.d-lactones.g-lactones,b-carbonb-lactones(R)ORethanoic anhydrideacetic anhydridea symmetrical anhydrideethanoic methanoic anhydrideacetic formic anhydridea mixed anhydridesystematic name:common name:OCH3CH3COCOOCH3HCOCOTutorial:
Nomenclature of carboxylic
acids and their derivatives3-D Molecules:-Caprolactone;cis-2-Ethylcyclohexane-carboxamidedCH3OOOOCH2CH3OOOO2-oxacyclopentanone-butyrolactone2-oxacyclohexanone-valerolactone3-methyl-2-oxacyclohexanone-caprolactone3-ethyl-2-oxacyclopentanone-caprolactonesodium methanoatesodium formatepotassium ethanoatepotassium acetatesodium benzenecarboxylatesodium benzoatesystematic name:common name:ONaHCOOKCH3COO NaCOcarbonyl oxygencarboxyl oxygenethyl ethanoateethyl acetatephenyl propanoatephenyl propionatemethyl 3-bromobutanoatemethyl   -bromobutyrateethyl cyclohexanecarboxylatesystematic name:common name:ORRCOOCH2CH3CH3COOCH3CH3CHCH2COBrOCH2CH3COOCH3CH2COBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 674
Section 17.1Nomenclature
675AmidesAn amidehas an NHR,or group in place of the OH group of a carboxylic
acid. Amides are named by using the acid name,replacing 
Òoic acidÓor Òic acidÓwithÒamide.ÓFor acids ending with 
Òcarboxylic acid,ÓÒylic acidÓis replaced with 
Òamide.ÓIf a substituent is bonded to the nitrogen,the name of the substituent is stated first
(if there is more than one substituent bonded to the nitrogen,they are stated alphabet-

ically),followed by the name of the amide. The name of each substituent is preceded

by a capital Nto indicate that the substituent is bonded to a nitrogen.Cyclic amides are called lactams. Their nomenclature is similar to that of lactones.
They are named as 
Ò2-azacycloalkanones
Óin systematic nomenclature (
ÒazaÓis used
to designate the nitrogen atom). In their common names,the length of the carbon

chain is indicated by the common name of the carboxylic acid,and a Greek letter indi-

cates the carbon to which the nitrogen is attached.NitrilesNitrilesare compoundsthat contain a functional group. Nitriles are considered
carboxylic acid derivatives because,like all Class I carbonyl compounds,they react

with water to form carboxylic acids (Section17.18). In systematic nomenclature,ni-

triles are named by adding 
ÒnitrileÓto the parent alkane name. Notice that the triple-bonded carbon of the nitrile group is counted in the number of carbons in the longest

continuous chain. In common nomenclature,nitriles are named by replacing 
Òic acidÓof the carboxylic acid name with Òonitrile.ÓThey can also be named as alkyl
cyanides
Ñstating the name of the alkyl group that is attached to the group.
CNCNNHO2-azacyclohexanone-valerolactam2-azacyclopentanone-butyrolactam2-azacyclobutanone-propiolactamONHONHNR2NH2,ethanamideacetamide4-chlorobutanamide -chlorobutyramide
benzenecarboxamidebenzamidecis-2-ethylcyclohexanecarboxamidesystematic name:common name:NH2CH3CONH2ClCH2CH2CH2CONH2CONH2CH2CH3CON-cyclohexylpropanamideN-ethyl-N-methylpentanamideN,N-diethylbutanamideCH3CH2CH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3NCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2COCONHCH3CH2COCH3propenenitrileacrylonitrileethanenitrileacetonitrilemethyl cyanideCH3CNbenzenecarbonitrilebenzonitrilephenyl cyanideCNNN
5-methylhexanenitrile-methylcapronitrileisohexyl cyanideCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CCHC
CH2CH3systematic name:common name:3-D Molecule:AcetonitrileBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 675
676CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IPROBLEM 2Name the following compounds:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.i.
PROBLEM 3Write a structure for each of the following compounds:
a.phenyl acetated.
N-benzylethanamideg.
b.e.acidh.propanoic anhydride

c.butanenitrilef.ethyl 2-chloropentanoatei.cyclohexanecarbonyl 
chloride17.2Structures of Carboxylic Acids
and Carboxylic Acid DerivativesThe carbonyl carbon
in carboxylic acids and carboxylic acid derivatives is hy-
bridized. It uses its three orbitals to form bonds to the carbonyl oxygen,the
and a substituent (Y). The three atoms attached to the carbonyl carbon are in
the same plane,and their bond angles are each approximately 120
¡.The carbonyl oxygen
is also hybridized. One of its orbitals forms a bond
with the carbonyl carbon,and each of the other two orbitals contains a lone pair.

The remaining porbital of the carbonyl oxygen overlaps with the remaining 
porbitalof the carbonyl carbon to form a bond (Figure17.1).
psp2ssp2sp2OCY~120~120~120a-carbon,ssp2sp2g-caproicg-caprolactamb-bromobutyramideCH3OOOCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CN(CH3)2OCH3CH2CH2COKCOOHOCH3CH3CH2CH2COCH2CHCH3OOCH3CH2COCCH3ONHOCH3CH2CH2CH2CClCH3CH2CH2CNOC bond bondFigure 17.1
Bonding in a carbonyl group. The bond is formed by side-to-

side overlap of a porbital of carbonwith a porbital of oxygen.p3-D Molecules:Acetyl chloride;
Methyl acetate;
Acetic acid; AcetamideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 676
Section 17.3Physical Properties of Carbonyl Compounds
677Esters,carboxylic acids,and amides each have two major resonance contributors.
The second resonance contributor for acyl chlorides and acid anyhdrides is much

less important.The second resonance contributor (the one on the right) is more important for the
amide than it is for the ester or for the carboxylic acid because nitrogen is better than
oxygen at sharing its electrons. Nitrogen is less electronegative than oxygen and,

therefore,is better able to accommodate a positive charge.
PROBLEM 4Which is longer,the carbon
Ðoxygen single bond in a carboxylic acid or the carbon
Ðoxygenbond in an alcohol? Why?
PROBLEM 5There are three carbonÐoxygen bonds in methyl acetate.a.What are their relative lengths?
b.What are the relative infrared (IR) stretching frequencies of these bonds?
PROBLEM 6Match the compound with the appropriate carbonyl IR absorption band:
acyl chlorideand 
acid anhydrideesteramide17.3Physical Properties of Carbonyl Compounds
The acid properties of carboxylic acids have been discussed previously (Sections1.18
and 7.10). Recall that carboxylic acids have values of approximately 3
Ð5(AppendixII; see also 
ÒSpecial Topics I
Óin the 
Study GuideandSolutions Manual
).The acid properties of dicarboxylic acids will be discussed in Section17.21. The boil-

ing points and other physical properties of carbonyl compounds are listed in

AppendixI. Carbonyl compounds have the following relative boiling points:
relative boiling points
amidecarboxylic acidnitrileesteracyl chloridealdehydeketonepa1800 cm11730 cm11640 cm11750 cm11800OCROCH3OCROH
OCRNH
2CROCH
3CROH
CRNH
2OOOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 677
678CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IThe boiling points of the ester,acyl chloride,ketone,and aldehyde are lower than the
boiling point of the alcohol with a comparable molecular weight because the mole-

cules of those carbonyl compounds are unable to form hydrogen bonds with each

other. The boiling points of the carbonyl compounds are higher than the boiling point

of the ether because of the polar carbonyl group.
Carboxylic acids have relatively high boiling points because they form intermolecular
hydrogen bonds,giving them larger effective molecular weights.
Amides have the highest boiling points,because they have strong dipole
Ðdipole inter-actions since the resonance contributor with separated charges contributes signifi-

cantly to the overall structure of the compound (Section17.2). If the nitrogen of an

amide is bonded to a hydrogen,hydrogen bonds will form between the molecules. The

boiling point of a nitrile is similar to that of an alcohol because a nitrile has strong

dipoleÐdipole interactions (Section2.9).
Carboxylic acid derivatives are soluble in solvents such as ethers,chlorinated alkanes,
and aromatic hydrocarbons. Like alcohols and ethers,carbonyl compounds with fewer

than four carbons are soluble in water.
Esters,N,N-disubstituted amides,and nitriles are often used as solvents because
they are polar,but do not have reactive hydroxyl or amino groups. We have seen that

dimethylformamide (DMF) is a common aprotic polar solvent (Section10.3).
17.4Naturally Occurring Carboxylic Acidsand Carboxylic Acid DerivativesAcyl halides and acid anhydrides are much more reactive than carboxylic acids and
esters,which,in turn,are more reactive than amides. We will see the reason for this

difference in reactivity in Section17.5.
Because of their high reactivity,acyl halides and acid anhydrides are not found in
nature. Carboxylic acids,on the other hand,are less reactive and 
are
found widely in na-
ture. For example,glucose is metabolized to pyruvic acid. -Lactic acid is the
()-()CRCOHO
OHO
Rintermolecularhydrogen bondsbp  97.4 CCH3CH2CH2OHbp  57.5 Cbp 
 51 Cbp 
 56 Cbp 
 49 Cbp  10.8 CCH3CH2OCH3bp  213 Cbp 
 141 Cbp  97 CCH3CH2CNOCClCH3OCCH3CH3OCHCH3CH2OCOHCH3CH2OCNH2CH3CH2OCOCH3CH3CNCNCNNCOORRRRROHRRORRHRdipoleÐdipoleinteractionsintermolecularhydrogen bondNCR
CNRdipoleÐdipoleinteractionsBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 678
compound responsible for the burning sensation felt in muscles during anaerobic exer-
cise,and it is also found in sour milk. Spinach and other leafy green vegetables are rich

in oxalic acid. Succinic acid and citric acid are important intermediates in the citric acid
cycle (Section25.1),a series of reactions that oxidize acetyl-CoA to in biological

systems. Citrus fruits are rich in citric acid; the concentration is greatest in lemons,less

in grapefruits,and still less in oranges. -Malic acid is responsible for the sharp

taste of unripe apples and pears. As the fruit ripens,the amount of malic acid in the fruit

decreases and the amount of sugar increases. The inverse relationship between the levels

of malic acid and sugar is important for the propagation of the plant:Animals will not eat

the fruit until it becomes ripeÑat which time its seeds are mature enough to germinate
when they are scattered about. Prostaglandins are locally acting hormones that have

several different physiological functions (Sections17.10and 26.5),such as stimulating

inflammation,causing hypertension,and producing pain and swelling.
Esters are also commonly found in nature. Many of the fragrances of flowers and fruits
are due to esters. (See Problem27.)
Carboxylic acids with an amino group on the are commonly called 
aminoacids. Amino acids are linked together by amide bonds to form peptides and proteins
(Section23.7). Caffeine,another naturally occurring amide,is found in cocoa and cof-

fee beans. Penicillin G,a compound with two amide bonds (one of which is in a
ring),was first isolated from a mold in 1928 by Sir Alexander Fleming.
H3NCHCOORNHCHCORNHCHCORNHCHCORan amino acidgeneral structure for a peptide or a protein
amide bondsb-lactama-carbonbenzyl acetatejasmineisopentyl acetatebananamethyl butyrateappleCH3COCH2OCH3COCH2CH2CHCH3OCH
3CH3CH2CH2COCH3O()-()CO2Section 17.4Naturally Occurring Carboxylic Acids and Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
679oxalic acidpyruvic acidsuccinic acidCCOOCCOO(S)-()-lactic acidcitric acidOHOOCH2COOHHOOCCH2OHHOHOOHOHCH3CH3HCOOHOHCOOHCOHOO(S)-()-malic acidprostaglandin A
2HOHCOHOHOprostaglandin F2HHOOHHHOOCCH2OHCOOHCH3CH3NNNONcaffeinepiperine
the major component of black pepperpenicillin GNOCH3OOOSNHHOCOOKCH2CNHCH3CH3OBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 679
680CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IDALMATIANS: DONÕT TRY TO
FOOL MOTHER NATURE
When amino acids are metabolized,the excess ni-
trogen is concentrated into uric acid,a compound with five

amide bonds. A series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions degrades

uric acid to ammonium ion. The extent to which uric acid is de-
OCNH2H2Nuric acidexcreted by: birds, reptiles, insectsOOOHNNHNHHNallantoinmammalsallantoic acidmarine vertebratesureacartilaginous fish,amphibiaOOOH2NNHNHHNOOH2NNHOenzymeenzyme
enzymeenzymeCOHNH
2NH4XNHammonium saltmarine invertebratesgraded in animals depends on the species. Birds,reptiles,and
insects excrete excess nitrogen as uric acid. Mammals excrete

excess nitrogen as allantoin. Excess nitrogen in aquatic animals

is excreted as allantoic acid,urea,or ammonium salts.
Dalmatians,unlike other mammals,excrete high levels of
uric acid. The reason for this is that breeders of Dalmatians se-

lect dogs that have no white hairs in their black spots,and the

gene that causes the white hairs is linked to the gene that caus-

es uric acid to be converted to allantoin. Dalmatians,therefore,

are susceptible to gout (painful deposits of uric acid in joints).
Sir Alexander Fleming (1881Ð1955)
wasborn in Scotland,the seventh of eight children

of a farmer. In 1902,he received a legacy from

an uncle that,together with a scholarship,

allowed him to study medicine at the
University of London. He subsequently became

a professor of bacteriology there in 1928. He

was knighted in 1944.Sir Howard W. Florey (1898Ð1968)
was bornin Australia and received a medical degree

from the University of Adelaide. He went to

England as a Rhodes Scholar and studied at

both Oxford and Cambridge Universities. He

became a professor of pathology at the

University of Sheffield in 1931 and then at

Oxford in 1935. Knighted in 1944,he was

given a peerage in 1965 that made him Baron

Florey of Adelaide.
Ernest B. Chain (1906Ð1979)
was born inGermany and received a Ph.D. from Friedrich-

Wilhelm University in Berlin. In 1933,he left

Germany for England because Hitler had
come to power. He studied at Cambridge,and

in 1935 Florey invited him to Oxford. In 1948,

he became the director of an institute in Rome,

but he returned to England in 1961 to become

a professor at the University of London.
THE DISCOVERY OF PENICILLIN
Sir Alexander Fleming (1881
Ð1955) was born in
Scotland. He was a professor of bacteriology at
University College,London. The story is told that one day

Fleming was about to throw away a culture of staphylococcal

bacteria that had been contaminated by a rare strain of the mold

Penicillium notatum.
He noticed that the bacteria had disap-
peared wherever there was a particle of mold. This suggested to

him that the mold must have produced an antibacterial sub-

stance. Ten years later,Howard Florey and Ernest Chain

isolated the active substance
Ñpenicillin G (Section17.16)
Ñbut the delay allowed the sulfa drugs to be the first antibiotics.

After penicillin G was found to cure bacterial infections in

mice,it was used successfully in 1941 on nine cases of human

bacterial infections. By 1943,penicillin G was being produced

for the military and was first used for war casualties in Sicily

and Tunisia. The drug became available to the civilian popula-

tion in 1944. The pressure of the war made the determination of

penicillin GÕs structure a priority because once its structure was
determined,large quantities of the drug could be produced.
Fleming,Florey,and Chain shared the 1945 Nobel Prize in
physiology or medicine. Chain also discovered penicillinase,

the enzyme that destroys penicillin (Section17.16). Although

Fleming is generally given credit for the discovery of peni-

cillin,there is clear evidence that the germicidal activity of the

mold was recognized in the nineteenth century by Lord

Joseph Lister (1827
Ð1912),the English physician renowned
for the introduction of aseptic surgery.
BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 680
Section 17.5How Class I Carbonyl Compounds React
681A compound that has an carbon
bonded to an oxygen atom generally
will be unstable if the carbon is

bonded to another electronegative

atom.sp3sp3The weaker the base, the better it is as aleaving group.
17.5How Class I Carbonyl Compounds ReactThe reactivity of carbonyl compounds resides in the polarity of the carbonyl group;
oxygen is more electronegative than carbon. The carbonyl carbon,therefore,is an

electrophile,so we can safely predict that it will be attacked by nucleophiles.
When a nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon of a carboxylic acid derivative,the
carbonÐoxygen bond breaks and an intermediate is formed. The intermediate is
called a tetrahedral intermediate
because the trigonal carbon in the reactant has
become a tetrahedral carbon in the intermediate. Generally,a compound that 

has an carbon bonded to an oxygen atom will be unstable if the carbon is bond-

ed to another electronegative atom. The tetrahedral intermediate,therefore,is unstable

because Y and Z are both electronegative atoms. A lone pair on the oxygen reforms the
bond,and either or is expelled with its bonding electrons.
Whether or is expelled depends on their relative basicities. The weaker base
is expelled preferentially,making this another example of the principle we first saw in

Section10.3:
The weaker the base,the better it is as a leaving group
. Because a weakbase does not share its electrons as well as a strong base does,a weaker base forms a

weaker bond
Ñone that is easier to break. If is a much weaker base than 
will be expelled. In such a case,and the reaction can be written as follows:
In this case,no new product is formed. The nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon,but
the tetrahedral intermediate expels the attacking nucleophile and reforms the reactants.
On the other hand,if is a much weaker base than will be expelled and a
new product will be formed. In this case,and the reaction can be written

as follows:
CZYRCZYRk2k2CYZROOOYis a weakerbase than Zk1k121,YZ,YCYk1k1ZROCZYROZis a weakerbase than Y12,ZY,ZZYZCYZsp2sp2sp3RRCYOCZa tetrahedral intermediateYRk2k2OOk1k1Z 1Y 2psp3sp3(sp3)(sp2)pOCYRBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 681
682CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IFree energyProgress of the reactionTITIFree energyProgress of the reactionTIFree energyProgress of the reactiona.b.c.
Figure 17.2
Reaction coordinate diagrams for nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions in which (a)the
nucleophile is a weaker base than the group attached to the acyl group in the reactant,
(b)the nucleophile is a stronger base than the group attached to the acyl group in the

reactant, and (c)the nucleophile and the group attached to the acyl group in the reactant

have similar basicities. TI is the tetrahedral intermediate.This reaction is called a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction
because a nucleo-phile has replaced the substituent that was attached to the acyl group in the

reactant. It is also called an acyl transfer reaction
because an acyl group has been
transferred from one group to another .
If the basicities of and are similar,the values of and will be similar.
Therefore,some molecules of the tetrahedral intermediate will expel and others

will expel When the reaction is over,reactant and product will both be present.

The relative amounts of each will depend on the relative basicities of and 
Ñthatis,the relative values of and 
Ñas well as the relative nucleophilicities of and
Ñthat is,the relative values of and 
These three cases are illustrated by the reaction coordinate diagrams shown in
Figure17.2.
1.If the new group in the tetrahedral intermediate is a weaker base than the group
that was attached to the acyl group in the reactant,the easier pathway
Ñthe lower
energy hill
Ñis for the tetrahedral intermediate (TI) to expel the newly added
group and reform the reactants,so no reaction takes place (Figure17.2a).
2.If the new group in the tetrahedral intermediate is a stronger base than the group
that was attached to the acyl group in the reactant,the easier pathway is for the

tetrahedral intermediate to expel the group that was attached to the acyl group in

the reactant and form a substitution product (Figure17.2b).
3.If both groups in the tetrahedral intermediate have similar basicities,the tetrahe-
dral intermediate can expel either group with similar ease. A mixture of reactant

and substitution product will result (Figure17.2c).
We can make the following general statement about the reactions of carboxylic acid
derivatives:
A carboxylic acid derivative will undergo a nucleophilic acyl substitution
reaction,provided that the newly added group in the tetrahedral intermediate is not a

much weaker base than the group that was attached to the acyl group in the reactant
.CYk1k1ZROCZYROCZYRk2k2Othe basicities ofYand Z aresimilar2.1ZY12ZYZ.Y21ZY(Z)(Y)(Y)(Z)For a carboxylic acid derivative toundergo a nucleophilic acyl substitution
reaction, the incoming nucleophile must

not be a much weaker base than the
group that is to be replaced.
Tutorial:
Free-energy diagrams for
nucleophilic acyl substitution
reactionsBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 682
LetÕs now look at a molecular orbital description of how carbonyl compounds react.
In Section1.6,which first introduced you to molecular orbital theory,you saw that be-

cause oxygen is more electronegative than carbon,the 2
porbital of oxygen contributes
more to the bonding molecular orbital
Ñit is closer to it in energy
Ñand the 2por-bital of carbon contributes more to the antibonding molecular orbital. (See

Figure1.8.) This means that the antibonding orbital is largest at the carbon atom,

so that is where the nucleophileÕs nonbonding orbitalÑin which the lone pair re-
sidesÑoverlaps. This allows the greatest amount of orbital overlap,and greater over-
lap means greater stability. When a filled orbital and an empty orbital overlap,the

result is a molecular orbitalÑin this case,a molecular orbital
Ñthat is more stablethan either of the overlapping orbitals (Figure17.3).
sp*p*pSection 17.6Relative Reactivities of Carboxylic Acids and Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
683OCOCZZa fillednonbonding
orbitalempty antibonding
orbitalC    Z  bonding
orbital          new CbondZEnergyC    O  antibonding
orbitalC    Z  antibonding
orbitalthese orbitals
overlapnonbonding
orbital of the
lone pairFigure 17.3
The filled nonbonding orbital containing the nucleophileÕs lone pair overlaps the empty antibonding molecular orbital of the carbonyl group, forming the new bond in the

tetrahedral intermediate.sp*PROBLEM 7Using the values in Table17.1,predict the products of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 8Is the following statement true or false?
If the newly added group in the tetrahedral intermediate is a stronger base than the group
attached to the acyl group in the reactant,formation of the tetrahedral intermediate is the

rate-limiting step of a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction.
17.6Relative Reactivities of Carboxylic Acidsand Carboxylic Acid DerivativesWe have just seen that there are two steps in a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction:
formation of a tetrahedral intermediate and collapse of the tetrahedral intermediate.
The weaker the base attached to the acyl group,the easier it is for 
both stepsof theCH3ONaClCH3COCONaOHCH3ClCOCH3ClNaCH3OCOCOCH3OCH3NaClCOpaBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 683
684CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds Ireaction to take place. In other words,the reactivity of a carboxylic acid derivative de-
pends on the basicity of the substituent attached to the acyl group:The less basic the

substituent,the more reactive the carboxylic acid derivative.
How does having a weak base attached to the acyl group make the 
first
step of thenucleophilic substitution reaction easier? First of all,a weaker base is a more elec-

tronegative base; that is,it is better able to accommodate its negative charge

(Section1.18). Thus,weaker bases are better at withdrawing electrons inductively

from the carbonyl carbon (Section1.18); electron withdrawal increases the carbonyl

carbonÕs susceptibility to nucleophilic attack.Second,the weaker the basicity of Y,the smaller is the contribution from the resonance
contributor with a positive charge on Y (Section17.2); the less the carboxylic acid

derivative is stabilized by electron delocalization,the more reactive it will be.
A weak base attached to the acyl group will also make the 
secondstep of the nucleo-
philic acyl substitution reaction easier because weak bases are easier to eliminate when

the tetrahedral intermediate collapses.In Section17.4we saw that in a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction,the nucleo-
phile that forms the tetrahedral intermediate must be a stronger base than the base that

is already there. This means that a carboxylic acid derivative can be converted into a

less reactive carboxylic acid derivative,but not into one that is more reactive. For ex-

ample,an acyl chloride can be converted into an anhydride because a carboxylate ion

is a stronger base than a chloride ion.the weaker the base, the easier it is to eliminateCZYROCresonance contributors of a carboxylic acid or carboxylic acid derivativeOCRYRY
Oinductive electron withdrawal by Y increases the electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbonCRYOOCl
OCRORNH2OHrelative basicities of the leaving groupsweakestbasestrongest
baserelative reactivities of carboxylic acid derivativescarboxylic acidROH
amideRNH
2acyl chloride
acid anhydrideOResterROR
mostreactiveleast
reactiveRCl
CORCOCOCOCOCOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 684
Section 17.7General Mechanism for Nucleophilic Acyl Substitution Reactions
685A carboxylic acid derivative will undergoa nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction,

provided that the newly added group in

the tetrahedral intermediate is not a
much weaker base than the group that

was attached to the acyl group in the

reactant.
All carboxylic acid derivatives react by the same mechanism.
Movie:Nucleophilic acyl substitutionAn anhydride,however,cannot be converted into an acyl chloride because a chloride ion
is a weaker base than a carboxylate ion.
17.7General Mechanism for NucleophilicAcyl Substitution ReactionsAll carboxylic acid derivatives undergo nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions by the
same mechanism. If the nucleophile is negatively charged,the mechanism discussed

in Section17.5is followed:The nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon,forming a

tetrahedral intermediate. When the tetrahedral intermediate collapses,the weaker base

is eliminated.If the nucleophile is neutral,the mechanism has an additional step. A proton is lost
from the tetrahedral intermediate formed in the first step,resulting in a tetrahedral in-

termediate equivalent to the one formed by negatively charged nucleophiles.This

tetrahedral intermediate expels the weaker of the two bases
Ñthe newly added group
after it has lost a proton or the group that was attached to the acyl group in the reactant.

(represents any species in the solution that is capable of donating a proton,and
represents any species in the solution that is capable of removing a proton.)
The remaining sections of this chapter cover specific examples of these general
principles. Keep in mind that 
all the reactions follow the same mechanism.
There-fore,you can always determine the outcome of the reactions of carboxylic acids and

carboxylic acid derivatives presented in this chapter by examining the tetrahedral

intermediate and remembering that the weaker base is preferentially eliminated

(Section17.5).
YRCOHCRH ORCOHH+YY 2OORCOHHBBYremoval ofa proton from
the tetrahedral
intermediateneutral nucleophile
attacks the carbonyl
carbonelimination of the
weaker base from the
tetrahedral intermediateOOBHBnegatively charged
nucleophile attacks
the carbonyl carbonelimination of the
weaker base from the
tetrahedral intermediateOYH ORCOOHYYOHORCCRan anhydrideROClno reactionRCOCOcarboxylate ionROan acyl chlorideRCl
an anhydrideROClRCOCOCOCOThe tetrahedral intermediate eliminates the weakest base.BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 685
acetyl chloride686CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IPROBLEM 9What will be the product of a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction
Ña new carboxylic
acid derivative,a mixture of two carboxylic acid derivatives,or no reaction
Ñif the new
group in the tetrahedral intermediate is the following?
a.a stronger base than the group that was already there
b.a weaker base than the group that was already there

c.similar in basicity to the group that was already there
17.8Reactions of Acyl HalidesAcyl halides react with carboxylate ions to form anhydrides,with alcohols to form es-
ters,with water to form carboxylic acids,and with amines to form amides because in

each case the incoming nucleophile is a stronger base than the departing halide ion
(Table17.1). Notice that both alcohols and phenols can be used to prepare esters.
All the reactions follow the general mechanism described in Section17.7. In the
conversion of an acyl chloride into an acid anhydride,the nucleophilic carboxylate ion

attacks the carbonyl carbon of the acyl chloride. Because the resulting tetrahedral inter-

mediate is unstable,the double bond is immediately reformed,expelling chloride ion

because it is a weaker base than the carboxylate ion. The final product is an anhydride.
OHphenyl propionateH2Obutyryl chloridebutyric acid
CH3NH3 Cl2 CH3NH2N-methylcyclohexanecarboxamidecyclohexanecarbonylchlorideNHCH3ClHClHpropionyl chlorideClCH3CH2ClCOOCH3CH2COOHCH3CH2CH2COClCH3CH2CH2COCOCOClClHacetyl chlorideacetic anhydride
CH3OHbenzoyl chloridemethyl benzoate
OCH3ClCH3ClCOOCH3COCH3COOCH3COCOCO3-D Molecule:Benzoyl chlorideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 686
Section 17.8Reactions of Acyl Halides
687In the conversion of an acyl chloride into an ester,the nucleophilic alcohol attacks
the carbonyl carbon of the acyl chloride. Because the protonated ether group is a

strong acid (Section1.17),the tetrahedral intermediate loses a proton. Chloride ion is

expelled from the deprotonated tetrahedral intermediate because chloride ion is a

weaker base than the alkoxide ion.
The reaction of an acyl chloride with ammonia or with a primary or secondary
amine forms an amide and HCl. The acid generated in the reaction will protonate un-

reacted ammonia or unreacted amine; because they are not nucleophiles,the protonat-

ed amines cannot react with the acyl chloride. The reaction,therefore,must be carried

out with twice as much ammonia or amine as acyl chloride so that there will be enough

amine to react with all the acyl halide.
Because tertiary amines cannot form amides,an equivalent of a tertiary amine such as
triethylamine or pyridine can be used instead of excess amine.
CH3NH2pyridineCH3CH3NHClNClNHCH3COCOO O OClClCH3CCl
OCOCH3Omechanism for the conversion of an acyl chloride into an acid anhydrideCH3COCH3COCH3CH3COCOCH3mechanism for the conversion of an acyl chloride into an esterCH3OHCH
3CH3OCH3ClCHHBBClOOCH3CCl
OClCH3COCH3COClNH3CH3NH2NH3HClNH4 ClCl2 CH3NHCH3CH3CH2CH3NH2CH3NH2CH3NH3 ClNCH3CH3NH2 ClCH3CH3COClCOCH3CH2NHCH3HClCOCOCOCH3COBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 687
688CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IPROBLEM 10SOLVED
a.Two amides are obtained from the reaction of acetyl chloride with a mixture of ethyl-
amine and propylamine. Identify the amides.
b.Only one amide is obtained from the reaction of acetyl chloride with a mixture of ethyl-
amine and pyridine. Why is only one amide obtained?
SOLUTION TO 10a
Either of the amines can react with acetyl chloride,so both
N-ethylacetamide and N-propylacetamide are formed.
SOLUTION TO 10b
Initially two amides are formed. However,the amide formed by
pyridine (a tertiary amine) is very reactive because it has a positively charged nitrogen atom,

which makes it an excellent leaving group. Therefore,it will react immediately with unre-

acted ethylamine,causing 
N-ethylacetamide to be the only amide formed in the reaction.PROBLEM 11Although excess amine is necessary in the reaction of an acyl chloride with an amine,ex-
plain why it is not necessary to use excess alcohol in the reaction of an acyl chloride with

an alcohol.PROBLEM 12Write the mechanism for the following reactions:
a.the reaction of acetyl chloride with water to form acetic acid
b.the reaction of acetyl bromide with methylamine to form 
N-methylacetamidePROBLEM 13Starting with acetyl chloride,what nucleophile would you use to make each of the follow-
ing compounds?a.c.e.
b.d.f.
CH3COONO2CH3COHOCH3CNHCH2CH3OCH3COCCH3OOCH3CN(CH3)2OCH3COCH2CH2CH3OClCH3CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2NH2NHCH2CH3CH3CH2NH3 Cl +CH3CH2CH2NH3 Cl +CH3NHCH2CH2CH3CH3N-ethylacetamideN-propylacetamideCOCOCOCH3ClCH3CH2NH2NCH3NHCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2NH2NCH3CNNHCH2CH3OBHBCH3CNNHH
CH2CH3OCH3CNHCH
2CH3N-ethylacetamideONNHClHClCOCOCOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 688
acetic anhydrideSection 17.9Reactions of Acid Anhydrides
68917.9Reactions of Acid AnhydridesAcid anhydrides do not react with sodium chloride or with sodium bromide because
the incoming halide ion is a weaker base than the departing carboxylate ion

(Table17.1).
Because the incoming halide ion is the weaker base,it will be the substituent expelled
from the tetrahedral intermediate.An acid anhydride reacts with an alcohol to form an ester and a carboxylic acid,
with water to form two equivalents of a carboxylic acid,and with an amine to form an

amide and a carboxylate ion. In each case,the incoming nucleophile
Ñafter it loses aprotonÑis a stronger base than the departing carboxylate ion. In the reaction of an
amine with an anhydride,two equivalents of the amine or one equivalent of the amine

plus one equivalent of a tertiary amine such as pyridine must be used so that sufficient

amine is present to react with the proton produced in the reaction.All the reactions follow the general mechanism described in Section17.7. For
example,compare the following mechanism for conversion of an acid anhydride

into an ester with the mechanism for conversion of an acyl chloride into an ester

presented on p. 687.OCH
3OCH3OCCH
3CH3CClOOClCCOOCH
3CH3Clno reactionCOCOH2OCH3CH3CH2OHbenzoic anhydride2benzoic acidacetic anhydrideethyl acetateacetic acid
CH3CH2CH2CH32 CH3NH2Opropionic anhydrideN-methylpropionamideOCH3CH2NHCH3CH3CH2H3NCH3OOH
CH3OCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCH3OCH2CH3COCH3OHCOOCH
3CH3OOOCH
3H3CCOCH3OCH3BHB
CH3CH3OOCH3HOCH3OHOCH3COmechanism for the conversion of an acid anhydride into an ester (and a carboxylic acid)CCO
OCCH3OOCOOCOOCBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 689
methyl acetate690CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IPROBLEM 14a.Propose a mechanism for the reaction of acetic anhydride with water.
b.How does this mechanism differ from the mechanism for the reaction of acetic anhy-
dride with an alcohol?PROBLEM 15We have seen that acid anhydrides react with alcohols,water,and amines. In which one of

these three reactions does the tetrahedral intermediate not have to lose a proton before it

eliminates the carboxylate ion? Explain.17.10Reactions of EstersEsters do not react with halide ions or with carboxylate ions because these nucleo-
philes are much weaker bases than the leaving group of the ester (Table17.1).
An ester reacts with water to form a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. This is an
example of a 
hydrolysis
reactionÑa reaction with water that converts one compound
into two compounds 
(lysisis Greek for Òbreaking down
Ó).An ester reacts with an alcohol to form a new ester and a new alcohol. This is an ex-
ample of an alcoholysisreaction. This particular alcoholysis reaction is also called a
transesterification reaction
because one ester is converted to another ester.
Both the hydrolysis and the alcoholysis of an ester are very slow reactions because water
and alcohols are poor nucleophiles and esters have very basic leaving groups. These reac-

tions,therefore,are always catalyzed when carried out in the laboratory. Both hydrolysis

and alcoholysis of an ester can be catalyzed by acids. (See Section17.11.) The rate of hy-

drolysis can also be increased by hydroxide ion,and the rate of alcoholysis can be in-

creased by the conjugate base of the reactant alcohol (Section17.12).
Esters also react with amines to form amides. A reaction with an amine that converts
one compound into two compounds is called 
aminolysis. Notice that the aminolysis ofan ester requires only one equivalent of amine,unlike the aminolysis of an acyl halide

or an acid anhydride,which requires two equivalents (Sections17.8and 17.9). This is

because the leaving group of an ester is more basic than the amine,so the alkox-

ide ionÑrather than unreacted amineÑpicks up the proton generated in the reaction.CH3CH2CH3CH2OHethyl propionatean aminolysis reactionN-methylpropionamideCH3CH2CH3NH2OCH2CH3NHCH3COCO(RO)(RO)CH3OHHClOCH2CH3methyl benzoatea transesterification reactionethyl benzoateCH3CH2OHOCH3COCOCH3CH3OHCH3H2OHClOHOCH3methyl acetatea hydrolysis reactionacetic acidCOCOROBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 690
Section 17.10Reactions of Esters
691transesterificationserine hydroxylgroupHOCH2++CH3COOCH3COCH
2OOOCHOOOCacetylsalicylateaspirinenzymeactiveacetylated enzymeinactivesalicylateacetylgroupASPIRINA transesterification reaction that blocks prosta-
glandin synthesis is responsible for aspirin
Õs activi-
ty as an anti-inflammatory agent. Prostaglandins have several

different biological functions,one of which is to stimulate
inflammation. The enzyme prostaglandin synthase catalyzes the
conversion of arachidonic acid into a precursor of

prostaglandins and the related thromboxanes (Section26.5).
PGH2,arachidonic acidPGH
2prostaglandinsthromboxanesprostaglandin synthasegroup reacts with aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) in a transesterifi-
cation reaction and becomes acetylated. This inactivates the en-

zyme. Prostaglandin therefore cannot be synthesized,and

inflammation is suppressed.Prostaglandin synthase is composed of two enzymes. One of
the enzymesÑcyclooxygenase
Ñhas a group (called a
serine hydroxyl group because it is part of the amino acid called
serine) that is necessary for enzyme activity. The 
CH2OHCH2OHThromboxanes stimulate platelet aggregation. Because aspirin in-
hibits the formation of it inhibits thromboxane production

and,therefore,platelet aggregation. Presumably,this is why low

levels of aspirin have been reported to reduce the incidence of
PGH2,strokes and heart attacks that result from blood clot formation.
AspirinÕs activity as an anticoagulant is why doctors caution
patients not to take aspirin for several days before surgery.
The reaction of an ester with an amine is not as slow as the reaction of an ester with
water or an alcohol,because an amine is a better nucleophile. This is fortunate,be-

cause the rate of the reaction of an ester with an amine cannot be increased by acid or
by or (Problem20). The aminolysis of an ester can be driven to completion

by using excess amine or by distilling off the alcohol as it is formed.
InSection7.10,we saw that phenols are stronger acids than alcohols. Therefore,
phenoxide ions are weaker bases than alkoxide ions which means that

phenyl esters are more reactive than alkyl esters.
CH3CH3is more reactive thanphenyl acetatepKa = 10.0methyl acetateOOHpKa = 15.5CH3OHOCH3COCO(RO),(ArO)CH3CH3excessCH3OHCH3(CH2)4NH2NH(CH2)4CH3OCH3COCOROHO3-D Molecule:Phenyl acetateBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 691
PROBLEM 16Write a mechanism for the following reactions:
a.the noncatalyzed hydrolysis of methyl propionate
b.the aminolysis of phenyl formate,using methylamine
PROBLEM 17a.State three factors that contribute to the fact that the noncatalyzed hydrolysis of an ester
is a slow reaction.
b.Which is faster,hydrolysis of an ester or aminolysis of the same ester?
PROBLEM 18SOLVED
a.List the following esters in order of decreasing reactivity toward hydrolysis:
b.How would the rate of hydrolysis of the 
para
-methylphenyl ester compare with the rate
of hydrolysis of these three esters?SOLUTION TO 18a
Because the nitro group withdraws electrons from the benzene
ring and the methoxy group donates electrons into the benzene ring,the nitro-substituted

ester will be the most susceptible,and the methoxy-substituted ester the least susceptible,

to nucleophilic attack. We know that electron withdrawal increases acidity and electron do-

nation decreases acidity,so 
para
-nitrophenol is a stronger acid than phenol,which is a
stronger acid than para
-methoxyphenol. Therefore,the 
para
-nitrophenoxide ion is the
weakest base and the best leaving group of the three,whereas the 
para
-methoxyphenoxideion is the strongest base and the worst leaving group. Thus,both relatively slow steps of the

hydrolysis reaction are fastest for the ester with the electron-withdrawing nitro substituent

and slowest for the ester with the electron-donating methoxy substituent.
SOLUTION TO 18b
The methyl substituent donates electrons inductively into the ben-
zene ring,but donates electrons to a lesser extent than does the resonance-donating

methoxy substituent. Therefore,the rate of hydrolysis of the methyl-substituted ester is

slower than the rate of hydrolysis of the unsubstituted ester,but faster than the rate of

hydrolysis of the methoxy-substituted ester.
17.11Acid-Catalyzed Ester Hydrolysis
We have seen that esters hydrolyze slowly because water is a poor nucleophile and es-
ters have very basic leaving groups. The rate of hydrolysis can be increased by either

acid or When you examine the following mechanisms,notice a feature that

holds for all organic reactions:
1.In an acid-catalyzed reaction,all organic intermediates and products are posi-
tively charged or neutral; 
negatively charged organic intermediates and products
are not formed in acidic solutions.
2.In a reaction in which is used to increase the rate of the reaction,all organic
intermediates and products are negatively charged or neutral; 
positively charged
organic intermediates and products are not formed in basic solutions
.HOHO.CH3C>OOCH3CH3COO>OCH3CH3COOCH3CNO2>>OOCH3COOOCH3CH3COOCH3CNO
2OOCH3COOOCH3CH3COO692CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 692
Section 17.11Acid-Catalyzed Ester Hydrolysis
693Normal Ester Hydrolysis
The first step in the mechanism for acid-catalyzed ester hydrolysis is protonation of
the carbonyl oxygen by the acid. Recall that represents any species in the solu-

tion that is capable of donating a proton and represents any species in the solution

that is capable of removing a proton.
The carbonyl oxygen is protonated because it is the atom with the greatest electron
density,as shown by the resonance contributors.
In the second step of the mechanism,the nucleophile attacks the protonated
carbonyl group. The resulting protonated tetrahedral intermediate (tetrahedral intermedi-

ate I) is in equilibrium with its nonprotonated form (tetrahedral intermediate II). Either

the OH or the OR group of tetrahedral intermediate II (in this case,) can be

protonated. Because the OH and OR groups have approximately the same basicity,both

tetrahedral intermediate I (OH is protonated) and tetrahedral intermediate III (OR is pro-
tonated) are formed. (From Section1.20,we know that the relative amounts of the three

tetrahedral intermediates depend on the pH of the solution and the values of the pro-

tonated intermediates.) When tetrahedral intermediate I collapses,it expels in pref-

erence to because is a weaker base,thereby reforming the ester. When

tetrahedral intermediate III collapses,it expels rather than because
is a weaker base,thereby forming the carboxylic acid. (Tetrahedral intermediate
II is less likely to collapse,because both and are strong bases.) Acid-

catalyzed ester hydrolysis is discussed in greater detail in Section24.3.
CH3OHOCH3OHHOCH3OHH2OCH3OH2OpaOROCH3(H2O)CH3OCH3CH3OCH3resonance contributors of an esterCOCOOCH3CH3OCH3OHBHBCH3OCCBHBrepresents any species in the
solution that is capable of donating a
proton and represents any species in

the solution that is capable of removing

a proton.
BHBmechanism for acid-catalyzed ester hydrolysisHBCH3OCH3CH3OCH3H2OOCH3Ctetrahedral intermediate Itetrahedral intermediate IItetrahedral intermediate IIIOCH3OHOHBCH3COCH
3OHHBOHCH3COCH
3HOHOHCH3OHHBCH3OHCH3OHOprotonation ofthe carbonyl
groupformation ofa tetrahedral
intermediateelimination ofthe weaker baseequilibration of the 
three tetrahedral
intermediatesremoval of aproton from
the carbonyl groupOCCHHCOCHBBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 693
694CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IBecause and have approximately the same basicity,it will be as likely for
tetrahedral intermediate I to collapse to reform the ester as it will for tetrahedral

intermediate III to collapse to form the carboxylic acid. Consequently,when the reaction

has reached equilibrium,both ester and carboxylic acid will be present in approximately

equal amounts.Excess water will force the equilibrium to the right (Le Ch
›telierÕs principle; Sec-tion10.4). Or,if the boiling point of the product alcohol is significantly lower than the

boiling points of the other components of the reaction,the reaction can be driven to the

right by distilling off the product alcohol as it is formed.
The mechanism for the acid-catalyzed reaction of a carboxylic acid and an alcohol toform an ester and water is the exact reverse of the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed hy-

drolysis of an ester to form a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. If the ester is the desired

product,the reaction should be carried out under conditions that will drive the equilibri-

um to the left
Ñusing excess alcohol or removing water as it is formed (Section17.14).
PROBLEM 19Referring to the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of methyl acetate:a.What species could be represented by 
b.What species could be represented by 

c.What species is most likely to be in a hydrolysis reaction?

d.What species is most likely to be in the reverse reaction?
PROBLEM 20Referring to the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of methyl acetate,write the
mechanismÑshowing all the curved arrows
Ñfor the acid-catalyzed reaction of acetic acidand methanol to form methyl acetate. Use and to represent proton-donating and

proton-removing species,respectively.
Now let
Õs see how the acid increases the rate of ester hydrolysis. The acid is a cata-
lyst. Recall that catalystis a substance that increases the rate of a reaction without
being consumed or changed in the overall reaction (Section4.5). For a catalyst to in-

crease the rate of a reaction,it must increase the rate of the slow step of the reaction.

Changing the rate of a fast step will not affect the rate of the overall reaction. Four of

the six steps in the mechanism for acid-catalyzed ester hydrolysis are proton transfer

steps. Proton transfer to or from an electronegative atom such as oxygen or nitrogen is

a fast step. So there are two relatively slow steps in the mechanism:formation of a
BHBHBHBB?HB?excessOCH3CH3OHHClH2OOHCOCH3CH3COOCH3CH3OHCH3CH3HClexcessH2OOHCOCOOCH3CH3CH3H2OOHCH3OHHClboth ester and carboxylic acid will bepresent in approximately equal amounts
when the reaction has reached equilibriumCOCOCH3OHH2OTutorial:
Manipulating the equilibriumBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 694
Section 17.11Acid-Catalyzed Ester Hydrolysis
695tetrahedral intermediate and collapse of a tetrahedral intermediate. The acid increases
the rates of both of these steps.The acid increases the rate of formation of the tetrahedral intermediate by pro-
tonating the carbonyl oxygen. Protonated carbonyl groups are more susceptible than

nonprotonated carbonyl groups to nucleophilic attack because a positively charged

oxygen is more electron withdrawing than a neutral oxygen. Increased electron with-

drawal by the oxygen increases the electron deficiency of the carbonyl carbon,which

increases its attractiveness to nucleophiles.
The acid increases the rate of collapse of the tetrahedral intermediate by decreasingthe basicity of the leaving group,which makes it easier to eliminate. In the acid-

catalyzed hydrolysis of an ester,the leaving group is ROH,a weaker base than the

leaving group in the uncatalyzed reaction.
Hydrolysis of Esters with Tertiary Alkyl Groups
Esters with tertiary alkyl groups undergo hydrolysis much more rapidly than do other

esters because they hydrolyze by a completely different mechanism
Ñone that does
not involve formation of a tetrahedral intermediate. The hydrolysis of an ester with a

tertiary alkyl group is an reaction because when the carboxylic acid leaves,it

leaves behind a relatively stable tertiary carbocation.
Transesterification
Transesterification
Ñthe reaction of an ester with an alcoholÑis also catalyzed byacid. The mechanism for transesterification is identical to the mechanism for normal

ester hydrolysis,except that the nucleophile is ROH rather than As in hydrolysis,
H2O.SN1OHCH3COHOCH3tetrahedral intermediate in uncatalyzed ester hydrolysisOHCH3COHOCH3tetrahedral intermediate in acid-catalyzed ester hydrolysisH(RO)OCH3CH3CH3OCH3COmore susceptible
to attack by a
nucleophileCOless susceptibleto attack by a
nucleophileprotonation of the carbonyl oxygen increases the susceptibility ofthe carbonyl carbon to nucleophilic attackHAn acid catalyst increases the
electrophilicity of the carbonyl 

carbon atom and decreases the 

basicity of the leaving group.
HCH
3CH3CH3CH3HOCCH
3CH3CH3HOCCH
3CH3departure of theleaving group to form
a tertiary carbocationreaction ofthe carbocation
with a nucleophileHHBHBBCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3SN1H2OORCOORCOHORCCC
OCBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 695
696CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds Ithe leaving groups in the tetrahedral intermediate formed in transesterification have
approximately the same basicity. Consequently,an excess of the reactant alcohol must

be used to produce more of the desired product.PROBLEM 21Write the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed transesterification reaction of methyl acetate
with ethanol.17.12Hydroxide-Ion-Promoted Ester Hydrolysis
The rate of hydrolysis of an ester can be increased by carrying out the reaction in a
basic solution. Like an acid,hydroxide ion increases the rates of both slow steps of

the reaction.Hydroxide ion increases the rate of formation of the tetrahedral intermediate be-
cause is a better nucleophile than so more readily attacks the car-

bonyl carbon. Hydroxide ion increases the rate of collapse of the tetrahedral

intermediate because a smaller fraction of the negatively charged tetrahedral inter-

mediate becomes protonated in a basic solution. A negatively charged oxygen can

more readily expel the very basic leaving group because the oxygen does not

develop a partial positive charge in the transition state.
Notice that when is expelled,the final products are not the carboxylic acid and
methoxide ion because if only one species is protonated,it will be the more basic one.

The final products are the carboxylate ion and methanol because is more basic

than Since carboxylate ions are negatively charged,they are not attacked

by nucleophiles.Therefore,the hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis of an ester,unlike the acid-catalyzed
hydrolysis of an ester,is 
nota reversible reaction.
ONuCH3COCH3COO.CH3OCH3OOOHOCH3CH3H2OHOmechanism for hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis of an esterCOCH
3OHOHCH3COCH
3HOOHCH3OOCH3OHthe more basic the solution, the lower its concentrationCH3COCH3COCH3CO(RO)HOH2O,HOHClmethyl acetatepropyl alcoholpropyl acetate
methyl alcoholCH3OHCH3CH2CH2OHOCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH3COCH3COHydroxide ion is a better 
nucleophile than water.
BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 696
Section 17.12Hydroxide-Ion-Promoted Ester Hydrolysis
697This reaction is called a hydroxide-ion-promoted reaction rather than a base-cat-alyzed reaction because hydroxide ion increases the rate of the first step of the reaction

by being a better nucleophile than water
Ñnot by being a stronger base than water
Ñandbecause hydroxide ion is consumed in the overall reaction. To be a catalyst,a species

must not be changed by or consumed in the reaction (Section17.11). So hydroxide ion

is actually a reagent rather than a catalyst. Therefore,it is more accurate to call the

reaction a hydroxide-ion-promoted
reaction than a hydroxide-ion-catalyzedreaction.Hydroxide ion promotes only hydrolysis reactions,not transesterification reactions or
aminolysis reactions. Hydroxide ion cannot promote reactions of carboxylic acid deriva-

tives with alcohols or with amines because one function of hydroxide ion is to provide a

strong nucleophile for the first step of the reaction. Thus,when the nucleophile is sup-

posed to be an alcohol or an amine,nucleophilic attack by hydroxide ion would form a

product different from the product that would be formed from nucleophilic attack by an

alcohol or amine. Hydroxide can be used to promote a hydrolysis reaction because the

same product is formed,regardless of whether the attacking nucleophile is or 
Reactions in which the nucleophile is an alcohol can be promoted by the conjugatebase of the alcohol. The function of the alkoxide ion is to provide a strong nucleophile

for the reaction,so only reactions in which the nucleophile is an alcohol can be pro-

moted by its conjugate base.PROBLEM 22a.What species other than an acid can be used to increase the rate of a transesterification
reaction that converts methyl acetate to propyl acetate?
b.Explain why the rate of aminolysis of an ester cannot be increased by or 
You have seen that nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions take place by a mecha-
nism in which a tetrahedral intermediate is formed and subsequently collapses. The

tetrahedral intermediate,however,is too unstable to be isolated. How,then,do we

know that it is formed? How do we know that the reaction doesn
Õt take place by a one-
step direct-displacement mechanism (similar to the mechanism of an reaction) in

which the incoming nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon and displaces the leaving

groupÑa mechanism that would not form a tetrahedral intermediate?
transition state for a hypothetical one-stepdirect-displacement mechanismOCRORHOSN2RO.HO,H,CH3CH2OexcessCH3OHOCH2CH3CH3CH2OHOCH3COCOHO.H2OHClOCH3H2OCH
3OH
RCOOHRCOOreversible reactionNaOHOCH3H2OCH
3OH
RCORCOirreversible reactionBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 697
To answer this question,Myron Bender investigated the hydroxide-ion-promoted
hydrolysis of ethyl benzoate,with the carbonyl oxygen of ethyl benzoate labeled

with When he isolated ethyl benzoate from an incomplete reaction mixture,he

found that some of the ester was no longer labeled. If the reaction had taken place by

a one-step direct-displacement mechanism,all the isolated ester would have

remained labeled because the carbonyl group would not have participated in the

reaction. On the other hand,if the mechanism involved a tetrahedral intermediate,

some of the isolated ester would no longer be labeled because some of the label

would have been transferred to the hydroxide ion. By this experiment,Bender pro-

vided evidence for the reversible formation of a tetrahedral intermediate.
PROBLEM 23If butanoic acid and labeled methanol are allowed to react under acidic conditions,
what compounds will be labeled when the reaction has reached equilibrium?PROBLEM 24D. N. Kursanov,a Russian chemist,proved that the bond that is broken in the hydroxide-

ion-promoted hydrolysis of an ester is the acyl bond,rather than the alkyl 

bond,by studying the reaction of the following ester with HO
H2O:COCO18O18O.698CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IMyron L. Bender (1924Ð1988)
wasborn in St. Louis. He was a professor

of chemistry at the Illinois Institute of

Technology and at Northwestern

University.
H2OHOH2OHO
18OCH2CH3OHO18OHOHCOCH
2CH3CH3CH2O18OHCOCH
2CH3OH18OCOCH
2CH318OCH2CH3OH18CH3CH2OHCH3CH2O18OC18OHCOOHCOCOCOOunlabeled esterBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 698
a.Which of the products contained the label?
b.What product would have contained the label if the alkyl bond had broken?
PROBLEM 25SOLVED
Early chemists could envision several possible mechanisms for hydroxide-ion-promoted
ester hydrolysis:1.a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction
2.an reaction
3.an reaction
Devise an experiment that would distinguish among these three reactions.
SOLUTIONStart with a single stereoisomer of an alcohol whose OH group is bonded to
an asymmetric carbon,and determine the specific rotation of the alcohol. Then convert the

alcohol into an ester,using a method that does not break any bonds to the asymmetric car-

bon. Next,hydrolyze the ester,isolate the alcohol obtained from hydrolysis,and determine

its specific rotation.
If the reaction is a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction,the product alcohol will have the
same specific rotation as the reactant alcohol because no bonds to the asymmetric carbon

are broken (Section 5.12).
If the reaction is an reaction,the product alcohol and the reactant alcohol will have
opposite specific rotations because the mechanism requires back-side attack on the asym-

metric carbon (Section 10.2).If the reaction is an reaction,the product alcohol will have a small (or zero) specific
rotation because the mechanism requires carbocation formation,which leads to racemiza-

tion of the alcohol (Section 10.7).SN1SN2CH3HCCH2CH3HOH2OCH3CClOOHCH3HCCH2CH3OCCH
3OCH3CHCH2CH3CH3COOOH(S)-2-butanol(S)-2-butyl acetate2-butanolRRROHHOOORCORCOSN1RH ROHOOORCORCOSN2ORH ORCOHORROHOORCORCOCO18O18Oalkyl CO bond
18acyl CO bond
CH2CH3OCH3CH2COSection 17.12Hydroxide-Ion-Promoted Ester Hydrolysis
699BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 699
17.13Soaps, Detergents, and MicellesFats
and oilsare triesters of glycerol. Glycerol contains three alcohol groups and
therefore can form three ester groups. When the ester groups are hydrolyzed in a basic

solution,glycerol and carboxylate ions are formed. The carboxylic acids that are

bonded to glycerol in fats and oils have long,unbranched R groups. Because they are

obtained from fats,long-chain unbranched carboxylic acids are called 
fatty acids. InSection26.3,we will see that the difference between a fat and an oil resides in the

structure of the fatty acids.
Soapsare sodium or potassium salts of fatty acids. Thus,soaps are obtained when
fats or oils are hydrolyzed under basic conditions. The hydrolysis of an ester in a basic

solution is called saponification
Ñthe Latin word for 
ÒsoapÓis sapo. The following
compounds are three of the most common soaps:PROBLEM 26SOLVED
An oil obtained from coconuts is unusual in that all three fatty acid components are identi-
cal. The molecular formula of the oil is What is the molecular formula of the

carboxylate ion obtained when the oil is saponified?
SOLUTIONWhen the oil is saponified,it forms glycerol and three equivalents of car-
boxylate ion. In losing glycerol,the fat loses three carbons and five hydrogens. Thus,the

three equivalents of carboxylate ion have a combined molecular formula of 

Dividing by three gives a molecular formula of for the carboxylate ion.
Long-chain carboxylate ions do not exist as individual ions in aqueous solution. In-
stead,they arrange themselves in spherical clusters called 
micelles,as shown in
Figure17.4. Each micelle contains 50 to 100 long-chain carboxylate ions. A micelle

resembles a large ball,with the polar head of each carboxylate ion and its counterion

on the outside of the ball because of their attraction for water and the nonpolar tail

buried in the interior of the ball to minimize its contact with water. The attractive

forces of hydrocarbon chains for each other in water are called 
hydrophobic inter-
actions(Section23.14). Soap has cleansing ability because nonpolar oil molecules,
which carry dirt,dissolve in the nonpolar interior of the micelle and are carried away

with the soap during rinsing.C14H27O2C42H81O6.C45H86O6.sodium stearateOCH3(CH2)16CO Nasodium oleateCH3(CH2)7CHOCH(CH2)7CO Nasodium linoleateCHCH2CHCH3(CH2)4CHOCH(CH2)7CO Naa fat or an oilglycerolsodium salts of fatty acidssoapCH2OCOR1CHOC
OR2NaOHCH2OCOR3R1COO NaR2COO NaR3COO NaH2OCH2OHCHOHCH2OH700CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I3-D Molecules:Sodium stearate;
Sodium oleate;
Sodium linoleateBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 700
Section 17.13Soaps, Detergents, and Micelles
701NaCO2H2OO2CO2CO2CO2CCO2CO2CO2CO2CO2NaNaNaNaNaNaNaNanonpolar tailpolar headgroupcounterionFigure 17.4
In aqueous solution, soap forms micelles, with the polar heads (carboxylate groups) on thesurface and the nonpolar tails (fatty acid R groups) in the interior.
MAKING SOAPFor thousands of years,soap was prepared by
heating animal fat with wood ashes. Wood ashes
contain potassium carbonate,which makes the solution basic.

The modern commercial method of making soap involves

boiling fats or oils in aqueous sodium hydroxide and adding

sodium chloride to precipitate the soap,which is then dried

and pressed into bars. Perfume can be added for scented
soaps,dyes can be added for colored soaps,sand can be added

for scouring soaps,and air can be blown into the soap to make

it float in water.
Making soapBecause the surface of the micelle is negatively charged,the individual micelles
repel each other instead of clustering to form larger aggregates. As river water flows

over and around rocks,it leaches out calcium and magnesium ions. The concentration

of calcium and magnesium ions in water is described by its 
Òhardness.ÓHard water
contains high concentrations of these ions; soft water contains few,if any,calcium and

magnesium ions. While micelles with sodium and potassium cations are dispersed in

water,micelles with calcium and magnesium cations form aggregates. In hard water,

therefore,soaps form a precipitate that we know as 
Òbathtub ringÓor Òsoap scum.ÓThe formation of soap scum in hard water led to a search for synthetic materials
that would have the cleansing properties of soap,but would not form scum when they

encountered calcium and magnesium ions. The synthetic 
ÒsoapsÓthat were developed,
known as 
detergents
,are salts of benzene sulfonic acids. Calcium and magnesium
sulfonate salts do not form aggregates. 
ÒDetergent
Ócomes from the Latin 
detergere
,BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 701
acetic acid702CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds Iwhich means Òto wipe off.
ÓAfter the initial introduction of detergents into the market-
place,it was discovered that straight-chain alkyl groups are biodegradable,whereas

branched-chain alkyl groups are not. To prevent nonbiodegradable detergents from

polluting rivers and lakes,detergents should have straight-chain alkyl groups.
Compounds that lower the surface tension of water are called 
surfactants. Surfac-
tants have a polar head group and a long-chain nonpolar tail. Soaps and detergents are

surfactants
Ñthat is why soap and detergent solutions feel slippery. Lowering the
surface tension enables the soap or detergent to penetrate the fibers of a fabric,thus

enhancing its cleaning ability. Because the polar head of a soap or a detergent is

negatively charged,it is called an 
anionicsurfactant. 
Cationicsurfactants are used
widely as fabric softeners and hair conditioners.
17.14Reactions of Carboxylic AcidsCarboxylic acids can undergo nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions only when they
are in their acidic forms. The basic form of a carboxylic acid does not undergo nucleo-

philic acyl substitution reactions because the negatively charged carboxylate ion is

resistant to nucleophilic attack (Section17.12). Thus,carboxylate ions are even less

reactive toward nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions than are amides.
Carboxylic acids have approximately the same reactivity as esters
Ñthe leav-
ing group of a carboxylic acid has approximately the same basicity as the leaving

group of an ester. Therefore,like esters,carboxylic acids do not react with halide ions

or with carboxylate ions.Carboxylic acids react with alcohols to form esters. The reaction must be carried
out in an acidic solution,not only to catalyze the reaction but also to keep the car-

boxylic acid in its acid form so that it will react with the nucleophile. Because the

tetrahedral intermediate formed in this reaction has two potential leaving groups of ap-

proximately the same basicity,the reaction must be carried out with excess alcohol to

drive it toward products. Emil Fischer (Section5.5) was the first to discover that an

ester could be prepared by treating a carboxylic acid with excess alcohol in the pres-

ence of an acid catalyst,so the reaction is called a 
Fischer esterification
.Carboxylic acids do not undergo nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions with amines.
Because a carboxylic acid has a lower than a protonated amine,the carboxylic 
paCH3HClmethyl alcoholexcessmethyl acetateacetic acidH2OCH3OHOCH3COCH3OHCOROHOOROHRNH
2Rrelative reactivities toward nucleophilic acyl substitutionCOCOCOmost reactiveleast reactivea cationic surfactanta germicideCH3ClÐCH3an anionic surfactanta detergentOOa sulfonic acidOOCH2N(CH2)15CH3OÐ Na++SCH3(CH2)11OHSRBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 702
acid immediately donates a proton to the amine when the two compounds are mixed.
The ammonium carboxylate salt is the final product of the reaction; the carboxylate ion

is unreactive and the protonated amine is not a nucleophile.
PROBLEM 27Using an alcohol for one method and an alkyl halide for the other,show two ways to make
each of the following esters:
a.methyl butyrate (odor of apples)d.octyl acetate (odor of oranges)
b.propyl acetate (odor of pears)e.isopentyl acetate (odor of bananas)

c.ethyl butyrate (odor of pineapple)f.methyl phenylethanoate (odor of honey)
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
When you are asked to propose a mechanism,look carefully at the reagents to determine the
first step of the mechanism. One of the reagents has two functional groups:a carboxyl group

and a carbonÐcarbon double bond. The other reagent,does not react with carboxylic
acids,but does react with alkenes (Section4.7). One side of the alkene is sterically hindered

by the carboxyl group. Therefore,will add to the other side of the double bond,forming

a bromonium ion. We know that in the second step of the addition reaction,a nucleophile will

attack the bromonium ion. Of the two nucleophiles present,the carbonyl oxygen is posi-

tioned to attack the back side of the bromonium ion,resulting in a compound with the

observed configuration. Loss of a proton gives the final product of the reaction.
Now continue on to Problem 28.
PROBLEM 28Propose a mechanism for the following reaction. (
Hint:Number the carbons to help you
see where they end up in the product.)
COCH3OCH2CHCH2CH2CHCCH
3H2SO4CH3COHH3CCH3OCH
3Br2Br2,Br2CH2Cl2OOHBr
OBrOHan ammoniumcarboxylate saltCH3CH3CH3CH2NH2CH3CH2CH3CH2NH3OOH3NCH2CH3OHNH4OHCOCOCOCOHBrBrOBrBr
OHOOBrBr
OHOOHOBrSection 17.14Reactions of Carboxylic Acids
703BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 703
acetamide704CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I17.15Reactions of AmidesAmides are very unreactive compounds,which is comforting,since proteins are com-
posed of amino acids linked together by amide bonds (Section23.11). Amides do not

react with halide ions,carboxylate ions,alcohols,or water because,in each case,

the incoming nucleophile is a weaker base than the leaving group of the amide

(Table17.1).
Amides do,however,react with water and alcohols if the reaction mixture is heated in
the presence of an acid. The reason for this will be explained in Section17.16.
Molecular orbital theory can explain why amides are unreactive. In Section17.3,
we saw that amides have an important resonance contributor in which nitrogen shares

its lone pair with the carbonyl carbon
Ñthe orbital that contains the lone pair overlaps
the empty orbital of the carbonyl group (Figure17.3). This overlap lowers the

energy of the lone pair
Ñit is neither basic nor nucleophilicÑand it raises the energy
of the orbital of the carbonyl group,making it less reactive to nucleophiles

(Figure17.5).
An amide with an group can be dehydrated to a nitrile. Dehydrating reagents
commonly employed for this purpose are ,,and .
P2O580 CCH3CH2NH2NCH3CH2CCOSOCl2POCl3P2O5NH2p*p*CH3H2OHClHClCH3CH3CH2NH3CH3CH2OHCH3NH3OHNHCH2CH3OCH2CH3NHCH3N-ethylacetamideN-methylbenzamideCOCOCOCOCH3OHno reaction
N-methylbenzamideNHCH2CH3CH3CH2H2Ono reaction
N-ethylpropanamideNHCH3COCONHCH2CH2CH3CH3Clno reactionN-propylacetamideN(CH3)2CH3CH2CH3Ono reactionN,N-dimethylpropionamideCOCOCO3-D Molecule:N-MethylbenzamideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 704
PROBLEM 29a.Which of the following reactions would lead to the formation of an amide?
b.For those reactions that do form amides,what could you do to improve either the rate of
amide formation or the yield of the amide product?PROBLEM 30Propose a mechanism for the reaction of an amide with thionyl chloride to form a nitrile.

(Hint:In the first step of the reaction,the amide is the nucleophile and thionyl chloride is
the electrophile.)Section 17.15Reactions of Amides
705resonance contributorsisolatedlone pairenergy-stabilized(delocalized) Òlone pairÓnew higher-energyantibonding orbitalEnergyCO isolated CantibondingorbitalO NH2RCONH2RCOFigure 17.5
The filled nonbonding orbitalcontaining nitrogenÕs lone pairoverlaps the empty antibonding

molecular orbital of the carbonyl
group. This stabilizes the lone pair,

making it less reactive, and raises
the energy of the orbital of the

carbonyl group, making it less able
to react with nucleophiles.p*p*R1.2.3.4.5.6.CH3NH2OHCORCH3NH2OCH3CORCH3NH2CH3OOCH3CORCH3NH2OCORCH3NH2ClCORCH3NH2HOOCH3CONATURE
ÕS SLEEPING PILLMelatonin,a naturally occurring amide,is a hor-
mone that is synthesized by the pineal gland fromthe amino acid tryptophan. Melatonin regulates the dark
Ðlightclock that governs such things as the sleep
Ðwake cycle,body
temperature,and hormone production.
tryptophanan amino acidNHNH3COOmelatoninCH3ONHHNOMelatonin levels increase from evening to night and then
decrease as morning approaches. People with high levels of

melatonin sleep longer and more soundly than those with low

levels. The concentration of the hormone in the blood varies

with ageÑ6-year-olds have more than five times the concen-
tration that 80-year-olds have
Ñwhich is one of the reasonswhy young people have less trouble sleeping than older people.

Melatonin supplements are used to treat insomnia,jet lag,and

seasonal affective disorder.
BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 705
706CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I17.16Acid-Catalyzed Hydrolysis of Amides
When an amide is hydrolyzed under acidic conditions,the acid protonates the car-
bonyl oxygen,increasing the susceptibility of the carbonyl carbon to nucleophilic at-

tack. Nucleophilic attack by water on the carbonyl carbon leads to tetrahedral

intermediate I,which is in equilibrium with its nonprotonated form,tetrahedral inter-

mediate II. Reprotonation can occur either on oxygen to reform tetrahedral intermedi-
ate I or on nitrogen to form tetrahedral intermediate III. Protonation on nitrogen is

favored because the group is a stronger base than the OH group. Of the two pos-

sible leaving groups in tetrahedral intermediate III (and ),is the weak-

er base,so it is expelled,forming the carboxylic acid as the final product. Since the

reaction is carried out in an acidic solution,will be protonated after it is expelled

from the tetrahedral intermediate. This prevents the reverse reaction from occurring.
LetÕs take a minute to see why an amide cannot be hydrolyzed without a catalyst. In
the uncatalyzed reaction,the amide is not protonated. Therefore,water,a very poor

nucleophile,must attack a neutral amide that is much less susceptible to nucleophilic

attack than a protonated amide would be. In addition,the group of the tetrahedral

intermediate is not protonated in the uncatalyzed reaction. Therefore,is the

group expelled from the tetrahedral intermediate
Ñbecause is a weaker base than
Ñwhich reforms the amide.An amide reacts with an alcohol in the presence of acid for the same reason that it re-
acts with water in the presence of acid.
OHCH3COHNH2tetrahedral intermediate inuncatalyzed amide hydrolysisOHCH3COHNH3tetrahedral intermediate inacid-catalyzed amide hydrolysisNH2HOHONH2COCtetrahedral intermediate Itetrahedral intermediate IIItetrahedral intermediate IIOHCH3NH2CH3NH2H2OOHCH3OCH3OHNH3NH4OHOHOH
2HOH2CH3CNH
2OHOHCH3CNH
2OHOHHOH2CH3CNH
3mechanism for acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an amideCOCHNH3NH3NH3HONH2Tutorial:
Conversions between
carboxylic acid derivativesAn acid catalyst increases the 
reactivity of a carbonyl group.
An acid catalyst can make a group a better leaving group.
BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 706
Section 17.16Acid-Catalyzed Hydrolysis of Amides
707growing bacteria die because they are unable to produce func-
tional cell walls. Penicillin has no effect on mammalian cells

because mammalian cells are not enclosed by cell walls. To

minimize hydrolysis of the ring during storage,peni-

cillins are refrigerated.b-lactamPENICILLIN AND DRUGRESISTANCE
Penicillin contains a strained ring. The
strain in the four-membered ring increases the amide
Õs reactivi-
ty. It is thought that the antibiotic activity of penicillin results

from its ability to acylate (put an acyl group on) a 

group of an enzyme that is involved in the synthesis of bacteri-

al cell walls. Acylation inactivates the enzyme,and actively
CH2OHb-lactamCH2OHenzymeactiveenzymeinactivepenicillinCH2OCOCH3CH3COO KSNHHHORCNHORCNHOHNSCOOKCH3CH3Bacteria that are resistant to penicillin secrete penicillinase,an
enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of the ring of

penicillin. The ring-opened product has no antibacterial activity.
b-lactampenicilinasepenicillinpenicillinoic acid
H2OONOOHN
PENICILLINS IN CLINICAL USEMore than 10 different penicillins are currently in
clinical use. They differ only in the group (R)
attached to the carbonyl group. Some of these penicillins are

shown here. In addition to their structural differences,the

penicillins differ in the organisms against which they are most
effective. They also differ in their resistance to penicillinase.
For example,ampicillin,a synthetic penicillin,is clinically ef-

fective against bacteria that are resistant to penicillin G,a natu-

rally occurring penicillin. Almost 19% of humans are allergic to

penicillin G.penicillin Goxacillincloxacillin
ampicillinamoxicillin
penicillin Openicillin VCH3NOCH2CHNH2CHOCH2HONH2CH3NClOCH2CHCH2SCH2RRR
Penicillin V is a semisynthetic penicillin that is in clinical use. It
is not a naturally occurring penicillin; nor is it a true synthetic

penicillin because chemists donÕt synthesize it. The 
Penicillium
penicillin V2-phenoxyethanolPenicilliummoldSNHHOCOOKOCH2CNHOCH2CH2OHCH3CH3Omold synthesizes it after the mold is fed 2-phenoxyethanol,the
compound it needs for the side chain.BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 707
PROBLEM 31List the following amides in order of decreasing reactivity toward acid-catalyzed hy-
drolysis:17.17Hydrolysis of an Imide: The Gabriel Synthesis
An imideis a compound with two acyl groups bonded to a nitrogen. The 
Gabrielsynthesis,which converts alkyl halides into primary amines,involves the hydrolysis
of an imide.In the first step of the reaction,a base removes a proton from the nitrogen of
phthalimide. The resulting nucleophile reacts with an alkyl halide. Because this is an
reaction,it works best with primary alkyl halides (Section10.2). Hydrolysis of the
N-substituted phthalimide is catalyzed by acid. Because the solution is acidic,the final
products are a primary alkyl ammonium ion and phthalic acid. Neutralization of the

ammonium ion with base forms the primary amine. Notice that the alkyl group of 

the primary amine is identical to the alkyl group of the alkyl halide.
Only one alkyl group can be placed on the nitrogen because there is only one hy-
drogen bonded to the nitrogen of phthalimide. This means that the Gabriel synthesis

can be used only for the preparation of primary amines.PROBLEM 32What alkyl bromide would you use in a Gabriel synthesis to prepare each of the following
amines?a.pentylaminec.benzylamine
b.isohexylamined.cyclohexylamine
ONHOphthalimidephthalic acidprimaryamineprimary alkylammonium ionan N-substitutedphthalimideHCl, H2OHOONRBr
RNH2COOCOORNH3COOHCOOHOONOHORBr
SN2SN2Gabriel synthesisRCH2BrRCH
2NH2708CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I3-D Molecule:PhthalimideCH3CNHOCH3CNHNO2OCH3CNHNO
2OCH3CNHOABCD
BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 708
acetonitrileSection 17.18Hydrolysis of Nitriles
709PROBLEM 33Primary amines can also be prepared by the reaction of an alkyl halide with azide ion,fol-
lowed by catalytic hydrogenation. What advantage do this method and the Gabriel synthe-

sis have over the synthesis of a primary amine using an alkyl halide and ammonia?
17.18Hydrolysis of Nitriles
Nitriles are even harder to hydrolyze than amides. Nitriles are slowly hydrolyzed to
carboxylic acids when heated with water and an acid.
In the first step of the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of a nitrile,the acid protonates the
nitrogen of the cyano group,making it easier for water to attack the carbon of the

cyano group in the next step. Attack on the cyano group by water is analogous to at-

tack on a carbonyl group by water. Because nitrogen is a stronger base than oxygen,

oxygen loses a proton and nitrogen gains a proton,resulting in a product that is a pro-

tonated amide (whose two resonance contributors are shown). The amide is immedi-

ately hydrolyzed to a carboxylic acidÑbecause an amide is easier to hydrolyze than anitrileÑfollowing the acid-catalyzed mechanism shown in Section17.15.
Because nitriles can be prepared from the reaction of an alkyl halide with cyanide
ion (Section10.4),you now know how to convert an alkyl halide into a carboxylic

acid. Notice that the carboxylic acid has one more carbon than the alkyl halide.
PROBLEM 34Which alkyl halides form the following carboxylic acids after reacting with sodium
cyanide and the product heated in an acidic aqueous solution?
a.butyric acidc.cyclohexanecarboxylic acid
b.isovaleric acid
CH3CH2BrCH
3CH2CCH3CH2OHNCNDMFHCl, H2OCOCH3CH2CNH2OCH3CH2OHNH4HClCOCH3CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2NCH
3CH2CH2NH2N2NN
N3H2Pta carboxylic acida protonated amide
RNCH2ORNH
OHHOH
2CRNH
CRNH
Cmechanism for acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of a nitrileOHOHHRNH
2COHRNH
2H2OCOROH
CHOH2H2O(several steps)BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 709
710CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I17.19Designing a Synthesis IV:
The Synthesis of Cyclic CompoundsMost of the reactions we have studied are intermolecular reactions:The two reacting
groups are in different molecules. 
Cyclic compounds are formed from intramolecu-
lar reactions
:The two reacting groups are in the same molecule. We have seen that
intramolecular reactions are particularly favorable if the reaction forms a compound

with a five- or a six-membered ring (Section11.11).
In designing the synthesis of a cyclic compound,we must examine the target
molecule to determine what kinds of reactive groups will be necessary for a suc-

cessful synthesis. For example,we know that an ester is formed from the acid-cat-

alyzed reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol. Therefore,a cyclic ester

(lactone) can be prepared from a reactant that has both a carboxylic acid group and

an alcohol group in the same molecule. The size of the lactone ring will be deter-

mined by the number of carbon atoms between the carboxylic acid group and the
alcohol group.A compound with a ketone group attached to a benzene ring can be prepared
using a FriedelÐCrafts acylation reaction (Section15.13). Therefore,a cyclic
ketone will result if a Lewis acid is added to a compound that contains both

a benzene ring and an acyl chloride group separated by the appropriate number of

carbon atoms.A cyclic ether can be prepared by an intramolecular Williamson ether synthesis
(Section11.9).
CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CCH3ClCH3NaOOClCH2CH2CH2CCH3CH3OH1. AlCl32. H2O1. AlCl32. H2OCH2CH2CClCH2CH2CH2CClOOOO(AlCl3)HClHClHOCH2CH2CH2CH2COHOOOOOHOCH2CH2CH2COHOthree intervening carbon atomsfour intervening carbon atomsBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 710
Section 17.20Synthesis of Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
711A cyclic ether can also be prepared by an intramolecular electrophilic addition reaction.
The product obtained from the intramolecular reaction can undergo further reac-
tions allowing for the synthesis of many different compounds. For example,the alkyl

bromide could undergo an elimination reaction,could undergo substitution with a

wide variety of nucleophiles,or could be converted into a Grignard reagent that could

react with many different electrophiles.
PROBLEM 35Design a synthesis for each of the following compounds,using an intramolecular reaction:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
17.20Synthesis of Carboxylic Acid DerivativesOf the various classes of carbonyl compounds discussed in this chapter
Ñacyl halides,
acid anhydrides,esters,carboxylic acids,and amides
Ñcarboxylic acids are the mostcommonly available both in the laboratory and in biological systems. This means that

carboxylic acids are the reagents most likely to be available when a chemist or a cell

needs to synthesize a carboxylic acid derivative. However,we have seen that car-

boxylic acids are relatively unreactive toward nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions

because the OH group of a carboxylic acid is a strong base and therefore a poor leav-

ing group. In neutral solutions (physiological ),a carboxylic acid is even

more resistant to nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions because it exists predomi-

nantly in its unreactive negatively charged basic form (Sections1.20and 17.14).

Therefore,both organic chemists and cells need a way to activate carboxylic acids so

that they can readily undergo nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions.
Activation of Carboxylic Acids for Nucleophilic Acyl SubstitutionReactions in the LaboratoryBecause acyl halides are the most reactive of the carboxylic acid derivatives,the easi-
est way to synthesize any other carboxylic acid derivative is to add the appropriate nu-

cleophile to an acyl halide. Consequently,organic chemists activate carboxylic acids

by converting them into acyl halides.
pH7.3CH2CH2CH2OHOCOOHCH3CH2CH2CHOCH2CH3OAlCl3/peroxideNBSCH2CH2CH2CH2ClBrHClCHCH2CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CHCH3OHCH3CH3OHCH3CH3OHOHBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 711
712CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds IA carboxylic acid can be converted into an acyl chloride by heating it either with
thionyl chloride or with phosphorus trichloride Acyl bromides can be

synthesized by using phosphorus tribromide All these reagents convert the OH group of a carboxylic acid into a better leaving group
than the halide ion.Therefore,when the halide ion subsequently attacks the carbonyl carbon and forms a
tetrahedral intermediate,the halide ion is 
notthe group that is eliminated.Notice that the reagents that cause the OH group of a carboxylic acid to be replaced by
a halogen are the same reagents that cause the OH group of an alcohol to be replaced

by a halogen (Section12.3).
Once the acyl halide has been prepared,a wide variety of carboxylic acid deriva-
tives can be synthesized by adding the appropriate nucleophile (Section 17.8).
an anhydrideRRO
OClRR
Clan esterROHROR
HClan amide2 RNH2RNHR
RNH3  ClCOCOCOCOCOCORCl
CORCl
COOCOOSROSO2ClOClClClOCRClSClRCO
ROClCOSOROCOPCl2ROCOPBr2good leaving groupsacetic acidCH3thionylchlorideSOCl2OHacetyl chlorideCH3SO2ClClHClbenzoic acidphosphorustribromide3 OHPBr33benzoyl bromidephosphorousacidH3PO3butanoic acidbutanoyl chloride
phosphorustrichlorideCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2PCl3H3PO3COOHCOCOBrCOCOCO33(PBr3).(PCl3).(SOCl2)BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 712
Section 17.20Synthesis of Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
7133-D Molecule:Adenosine triphosphateCarboxylic acids can also be activated for nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions
by being converted into anhydrides. Treating a carboxylic acid with a strong dehydrat-

ing agent such as yields an anhydride.
Carboxylic acids and carboxylic acid derivatives can also be prepared by methods
other than nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions. A summary of the methods used to

synthesize these compounds is given in AppendixIV.
Activation of Carboxylate Ions for Nucleophilic Acyl SubstitutionReactions in Biological SystemsThe synthesis of compounds by biological organisms is called 
biosynthesis. Acyl
halides and acid anhydrides are too reactive to be used as reagents in biological sys-

tems. Cells live in a predominantly aqueous environment,and acyl halides and acid

anhydrides are rapidly hydrolyzed in water. So living organisms must activate car-

boxylic acids in a different way.
One way living organisms activate carboxylic acids is to convert them into acyl
phosphates,acyl pyrophosphates,and acyl adenylates.
An acyl phosphate
is a mixed anhydride of a carboxylic acid and phosphoric acid; an
acyl pyrophosphate
is a mixed anhydride of a carboxylic acid and pyrophosphoric
acid; an acyl adenylate
is a mixed anhydride of a carboxylic acid and adenosine
monophosphate (AMP).The structure of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is shown below with 
ÒAdÓin place ofthe adenosyl group; adenosine monophosphate has two fewer phosphate groups.
Acyl phosphates are formed by nucleophilic attack of a carboxylate ion on the 
-phosphorus (the terminal phosphorus) of ATP. Attack of a nucleophile on the P
OgOHOOH
OOO
OOOPOOPOOPOOOOOPOPOOAdOPNH2NNNNadenosine triphosphateATPphosphoric acidHOOOHPOHOOHPOHHOOOHPOpyrophosphoric acidan acyl phosphatean acyl pyrophosphatean acyl adenylate
ROOOCOPOOROO
COROOCOAdOPOOPOOPCOCOCOP2O5OHO2P2O5BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 713
714CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds Igroup breaks a phosphoanhydride bond
(rather than the bond),so an intermediate
is not formed. Essentially,it is an reaction with an adenosine pyrophosphate leav-

ing group. This reaction and the ones that follow will be discussed in greater detail in

Sections27.3and 27.4.
Acyl pyrophosphates are formed by nucleophilic attack of a carboxylate ion on the
-phosphorus of ATP.
Acyl adenylates are formed by nucleophilic attack of a carboxylate ion on the 
-phosphorus of ATP.
Because these mixed anhydrides are negatively charged,they are not readily ap-
proached by nucleophiles. Thus,they are used only in enzyme-catalyzed reactions.

One of the functions of enzymes that catalyze biological nucleophilic acyl substitution

reactions is to neutralize the negative charges of the mixed anhydride (Section27.5).

Another function of the enzyme is to exclude water from the site where the reaction

takes place. Otherwise hydrolysis of the mixed anhydride would compete with the de-

sired nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction.
A thioesteris an ester with a sulfur atom in place of the oxygen atom between the
acyl and alkyl groups.
Thioesters are the most common forms of activated carboxylic acids in a cell.
Although thioesters hydrolyze at about the same rate as oxygen esters,they are

much more reactive than oxygen esters toward attack by nitrogen and carbon

nucleophiles. This allows a thioester to survive in the aqueous environment of the

cellÑwithout being hydrolyzed
Ñwaiting to be a substrate in a nucleophilic acyl
substitution reaction. a thioesterHCOSRenzyme-phosphorusOan acyl adenylateROOOCOPAdOOOOOPROCOPOOAdOPOOOOPOOOPpyrophosphateadenosine triphosphateATPabSN2pan acyl phosphateenzymeadenosine diphosphateADPadenosine triphosphateATPROOOCROOCOPOOOOPOOOPAdOOPOOOOPOOOPAd-phosphorusOOOPROOOCOPOOOOPAdOOPOOOOPOOOPAdROOCan acyl pyrophosphateadenosine monophosphateAMPadenosine triphosphateATP  -phosphorusenzymeBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 714
Section 17.20Synthesis of Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
715Coenzyme A was discovered by 
Fritz A. Lipmann (1899Ð1986)
.He also was the first to recognize its

importance in intermediary
metabolism. Lipmann was born in
Germany. To escape the Nazis,he

moved to Denmark in 1932 and to the

United States in 1939,becoming a

U.S. citizen in 1944. For his work on

coenzyme A,he received the Nobel

Prize in physiology or medicine in

1953,sharing it with Hans Krebs.
The carbonyl carbon of a thioester is more susceptible to nucleophilic attack than is
the carbonyl carbon of an oxygen ester because there is less electron delocalization

onto the carbonyl oxygen when Y is S than when Y is O. There is less electron delo-

calization because there is less overlap between the 3
porbital of sulfur and the 2por-bital of carbon,compared with the amount of overlap between the 2
porbital of oxygenand the 2porbital of carbon (Section17.2). In addition,a thiolate ion is a weaker base
and therefore a better leaving group than an alkoxide ion.
The thiol used in biological systems for the formation of thioesters is coenzyme A.
The compound is written ÒCoASHÓto emphasize that the thiol group is the reactive
part of the molecule.The first step in converting a carboxylic acid into a thioester is to convert the carboxylic
acid into an acyl adenylate. The acyl adenylate then reacts with CoASH to form the

thioester. The most common thioester in cells is acetyl-CoA.
Acetylcholine,an ester,is one example of a carboxylic acid derivative that cells
synthesize using acetyl-CoA. Acetylcholine is a 
neurotransmitter
Ña compound thattransmits nerve impulses across the synapses between nerve cells.
It is believed that one way genes are activated is by amide formation between acetyl-CoA
and a lysine residue (an amine) of a DNA-bound protein.
cholineacetyl-CoASCoACH3CH3CH3CH3CH3HOCH2CH2NCH3acetylcholineOCH2CH2NCH3CH3CoASHenzymeCOCOcoenzyme ACoASHCH2CH2NHCCH2CH2NHCCHHSCCH
2OOOHOCH3CH32O3POOHOOPOOOOPONH2NNNNCYRORCCH
3CH2SHpKa  10.5p
Ka  15.9CH3CH2OHYRORCH3OATPacetyl-CoAOOOOOPOPOCH3OOOCOpyrophosphatePAdOAdOPCH3SCoAAMPCoASHenzymeCOCOSCoACH3CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2CHNH
CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CHNH
CoASHa lysine residuean amideenzymeCOCOCCOOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 715
716CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds INERVE IMPULSES, PARALYSIS,
AND INSECTICIDESAfter a nerve impulse is transmitted between cells,
acetylcholine must be rapidly hydrolyzed to enable the recipient
cell to receive another impulse.
CH3OCH2CH2NCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3H2OacetylcholinesteraseCH3HOCH2CH2NCH3OCOCOAcetylcholinesterase,the enzyme that catalyzes this hydrolysis,
has a group that is necessary for its catalytic activity.

Diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP),a military nerve gas,in-

hibits acetylcholinesterase by reacting with the group.
CH2OHCH2OHWhen the enzyme is inhibited,paralysis occurs because the
nerve impulses cannot be transmitted properly. DFP is extreme-

ly toxic:Its (the lethal dose for 50% of the test animals) is

only of body weight.
0.5 mgkgLD50enzymeCH2OHFPO
OCH(CH3)2DFPOCH(CH3)2OCH(CH3)2OCH(CH3)2HFenzymeCH2OPOactiveinactiveMalathion and parathion,compounds related to DFP,are used
as insecticides. The of malathion is Para-
2800 mgkg.LD50thion is more toxic,with an of 
2 mgkg.LD50parathionO2NOmalathionCHSP
OCH3CH3CH2OCOCH3SPOCH2CH3OCH2CH3SOCH3CH2OCCH2O17.21Dicarboxylic Acids and Their DerivativesThe structures of some common dicarboxylic acids and their values are shown in
Table17.2.
Although the two carboxyl groups of a dicarboxylic acid are identical,the two 
values are different because the protons are lost one at a time and therefore leave from

different species. The first proton is lost from a neutral molecule,whereas the second

proton is lost from a negatively charged ion.
A COOH group withdraws electrons (more strongly than does an H) and therefore
increases the stability of the conjugate base that is formed when the first COOH group

loses a protonÑthereby increasing its acidity. The values of the dicarboxylic acids
papapaHOpKa1  2.86CH2OHpKa2  5.70OH H OCH
2OCOCOHOCH
2COCOCOCOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 716
Section 17.21Dicarboxylic Acids and Their Derivatives
717COHCOHHOCOHOHOCCOH
OHOCCH2COHOOHOCCH2CH2COHOOHOCCH2CH2CH2COHOOHOCCH2CH2CH2CH2COHPhthalic acidCarbonic acidOxalic acidMalonic acidSuccinic acidGlutaric acidAdipic acid2.953.581.272.864.214.344.415.416.354.275.705.645.275.28OOOOOTable 17.2
Structures, Names, and p
Ka Values of Some Simple Dicarboxylic
       AcidsDicarboxylic acidCommon namep
Ka1pKa2show that the acid-strengthening effect of the COOH group decreases as the separation
between the two carboxyl groups increases.
Dicarboxylic acids readily lose water when heated if they can form a cyclic anhydride
with a five-or a six-membered ring.
Cyclic anhydrides are more easily prepared if the dicarboxylic acid is heated in the
presence of acetyl chloride or acetic anhydride or if it is treated with a strong dehy-

drating agent such as P
2O5.CH2CH2COHOOOglutaric anhydridephthalic anhydrideOH2OCH2COHOglutaric acidCOHOCOH
Ophthalic acidH2OOOOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 717
718CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds ITutorial:
Common terms pertaining
to carboxylic acids and
their derivativesPROBLEM 36a.Propose a mechanism for the formation of succinic anhydride in the presence of acetic
anhydride.b.How does acetic anhydride help in the formation of succinic anhydride?
Carbonic acidÑa compoundwith two OH groups bonded to the carbonyl carbon
Ñis unstable,readily breaking down to and The reaction is reversible,so

carbonic acid is formed when is bubbled into water (Section1.20).
CO2H2OOHcarbonic acidHOCOCO2H2O.CO2HOOHHOOOsuccinic anhydrideglutaric anhydride2 CH3OHOacetic anhydrideCH3CH3OOsuccinic acidOHOOOOCOCOCOOOP2O5SYNTHETIC POLYMERS
Synthetic polymers play important roles in our daily
lives. Polymers are compounds that are made by
linking together many small molecules called monomers. In many
synthetic polymers,the monomers are held together by ester and
amide bonds. For example,Dacronis a polyester and nylon is a

polyamide.¨OCOCOCH2CH2OOCH
2CH2ODacronnONH(CH2)5CONH(CH2)5CONH(CH2)5Cnylon 6nSynthetic polymers have taken the place of metals,fabrics,
glass,ceramics,wood,and paper,allowing us to have a greater

variety and larger quantities of materials than nature could have

provided. New polymers are continually being designed to fit
human needs. For example,Kevlarhas a tensile strength
greater than steel. It is used for high-performance skis and bul-

letproof vests. Lexanis a strong and transparent polymer used

for such things as traffic light lenses and compact disks.
¨¨These and other synthetic polymers are discussed in detail in Chapter28.
OCOLexanCH3CH3CH3COOCOCH3COCH3CH3CnOCOCNH
NHOCOCNH
NHKevlarn3-D Molecules:Succinic acid;
Succinic anhydrideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 718
We have seen that the OH group of a carboxylic acid can be substituted to give a vari-
ety of carboxylic acid derivatives. Similarly,the OH groups of carbonic acid can be

substituted by other groups.PROBLEM 37What products would you expect to obtain from the following reactions?
a.d.
b.e.

c.f.
b-ethylglutaric acidacetyl chloridemethyl carbamatemethylamineureawaterHmalonic acid2 acetyl chlorideureawaterphosgeneexcess diethylamineSummary719SummaryA carbonyl group
is a carbon double-bonded to an oxygen;
an acyl group
is a carbonyl group attached to an alkyl or
aryl group. 
Acyl halides, acid anhydrides, esters
,and
amidesare called carboxylic acid derivatives
because they
differ from a carboxylic acid only in the nature of the group

that has replaced the OH group of the carboxylic acid.

Cyclic esters are called 
lactones; cyclic amides are 
lactams.There are 
symmetrical anhydrides
and mixed anhydrides
.Carbonyl compounds
can be placed in one of two class-
es. Class I carbonyl compounds contain a group that can be

replaced by another group; carboxylic acids and carboxylic

acid derivatives belong to this class. Class II carbonyl com-

pounds do not contain a group that can be replaced by

another group; aldehydes and ketones belong to this class.
The reactivity of carbonyl compounds resides in the polarity
of the carbonyl group; the carbonyl carbon has a partial positive

charge that is attractive to nucleophiles. Class I carbonyl

compounds undergo 
nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions
:a nucleophile replaces the substituent that was attached to the

acyl group in the reactant. All Class I carbonyl compounds react

with nucleophiles in the same way:the nucleophile attacks the

carbonyl carbon,forming an unstable 
tetrahedral intermedi-ate. (Generally,a compound with an carbon bonded to an
oxygen is unstable if the carbon is bonded to another

electronegative atom.) The tetrahedral intermediate reforms a

carbonyl compound by eliminating the weakest base.
A carboxylic acid derivative will undergo a nucleophilic
acyl substitution reaction provided that the newly added

group in the tetrahedral intermediate is not a much weaker

base than the group that was attached to the acyl group in the

reactant. The weaker the base attached to the acyl group,the

easier it is for both steps of the nucleophilic acyl substitution

reaction to take place. The relative reactivities toward nucleo-

philic acyl substitution:acyl halides 
acid anhydrides carboxylic acids and esters amides carboxylate ions.
Hydrolysis
,alcoholysis,and 
aminolysisare reactions inwhich water,alcohols,and amines,respectively,convert one
sp3sp3compound into two compounds. A 
transesterification reac-
tionconverts one ester to another ester. Treating a carboxylic
acid with excess alcohol and an acid catalyst is called a

Fischer esterification
. An ester with a tertiary alkyl group
hydrolyzes via an reaction.
The rate of hydrolysis can be increased by either acid orthe rate of alcoholysis can be increased by either acid or An acid increases the rate of formation of the

tetrahedral intermediate by protonating the carbonyl oxy-

gen,which increases the electrophilicity of the carbonyl

group,and by decreasing the basicity of the leaving group,

which makes it easier to eliminate. Hydroxide (or alkox-

ide) ion increases the rate of formation of the tetrahedral

intermediateÑit is a better nucleophile than water (or an
alcohol)Ñand increases the rate of collapse of the tetrahe-dral intermediate. Hydroxide ion promotes only hydrolysis

reactions; alkoxide ion promotes only alcoholysis reac-

tions. In an acid-catalyzed reaction,all organic reactants,

intermediates,and products are positively charged or neu-

tral; in hydroxide-ion- or alkoxide-ion-promoted reactions,

all organic reactants,intermediates,and products are nega-

tively charged or neutral.
Fats
and oilsare triesters of glycerol. Hydrolyzing theester groups in a basic solution (
saponification
) forms glyc-erol and fatty acid salts (soaps). Long-chain carboxylate ions

arrange themselves in spherical clusters called 
micelles. Theattractive forces of hydrocarbon chains for each other in

water are called 
hydrophobic interactions
.Amides are unreactive compounds but do react with water
and alcohols if the reaction mixture is heated in the presence

of an acid. Nitriles are harder to hydrolyze than amides. The

Gabriel synthesis,which converts alkyl halides into primary
amines,involves the hydrolysis of an 
imide.Organic chemists activate carboxylic acids by converting
them into acyl halides or acid anhydrides. Cells activate car-

boxylic acids by converting them into 
acyl phosphates
,acylpyrophosphates
,acyl adenylates,and 
thioesters.RO.HO;SN1ClphosgeneClOCH
3dimethyl carbonateCH3ONH
2ureaH2NOH
carbamic acidH2NOCH
3methyl carbamateH2NCOCOCOCOCOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 719
720CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds ISummary of Reactions1.Reactions of acyl halides (Section17.8)
2.Reactions of acid anhydrides (Section17.9)
3.Reactions of esters (Sections17.10
Ð17.13)OHONHCH3CH3OHHClROHCH3NH2ROHH2OHClROHH2OHOROHOORRCORCORCORCORCOORRCOORRCOORRCOCH3CH3OHORCOH2 CH3NH2ORCO H3NCH3H2O2OORRCOOCH3RCONHCH3RCOOHRCOCOORRCOCOORRCOCClCH3OHHCl
2 CH3NH2NHCH3CH3NH3 ClH2OHCl
OClRCOClRCOClRCOClRCOOCH3ROCCOOCH3RCOOHRCORCOOCH3CBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 720
Summary of Reactions7214.Reactions of carboxylic acids (Section17.14)
5.Reactions of amides (Sections17.15and 17.16)
6.Gabriel synthesis of primary amines (Section17.17)
7.Hydrolysis of nitriles (Section17.18)
8.Activation of carboxylic acids by chemists (Section17.20)
9.Activation of carboxylic acids by cells (Section17.20)
enzymeROOOCROOCOPOOOOPOOOPAdOOPOOOOPOOOPAdOOOPROOOCOPOOOOPAdOOPOOOOPOOOPAdROOCenzymeSOCl2SO2HClPCl3P2O5H3PO3OHClClOROHOHORCORCORCORCOCORC332ORCHClNH4RCNH
2OOHORCRCH2BrRCH2NH21. phthalimide, HO2. HCl, H2O, 3. HOH2OHClNH4RCN
P2O5NH2OHNH2ORCORCORCOHOHOCH3O H3NCH3CH3OHHClH2OCH3NH2ORCORCORCORCBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 721
722CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I10.Dehydration of dicarboxylic acids (Section17.21)
P2O5OOHOOHOOOOCH32OHCH3CH3OOOOOOOOHOOHOHOOH
OH2OOCOCOCenzymeOROOOCOPAdOOOOOPROCOPOOAdOPenzymeenzymeOOOCH3CSCoA
AMPCOPAdOOOOOPCH3CH3OCOPOOAdOPOOOOPOOOOPOacetyl-CoAKey Terms
acid anhydride (p.673)
acyl adenylate (p.713)

acyl group (p.670)

acyl halide (p.673)

acyl phosphate (p.713)

acyl pyrophosphate (p.713)

acyl transfer reaction (p.682)

alcoholysis (p.690)
(p.672)
amide (p.675)

amino acid (p.679)

aminolysis (p.690)

biosynthesis (p.713)

carbonyl carbon (p.676)

carbonyl compound (p.670)

carbonyl group (p.670)
a-carboncarbonyl oxygen (p.676)
carboxyl group (p.673)

carboxylic acid (p.671)

carboxylic acid derivative (p.670)

carboxyl oxygen (p.674)

catalyst (p.694)

detergent (p.701)

ester (p.674)

fatty acid (p.700)

fats (p.700)

Fischer esterification (p.702)

Gabriel synthesis (p.708)

hydrolysis (p.690)

hydrophobic interactions (p.700)

imide (p.708)

lactam (p.675)
lactone (p.674)
micelle (p.700)

mixed anhydride (p.673)

neurotransmitter (p.715)

nitriles (p.675)

nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction 
(p. 682)oils (p.700)

phoshoanhydride bond (p.714)

ritter reaction (p.728)

saponification (p.700)

soap (p.700)

symmetrical anhydride (p.673)

tetrahedral intermediate (p.681)

thioester (p.714)

transesterification reaction (p.690)
Problems
38.Write a structure for each of the following compounds:
a.N,N-dimethylhexanamidee.propionyl bromideh.
b.3,3-dimethylhexanamidef.sodium acetatei.3-methylbutanenitrile

c.cyclohexanecarbonyl chlorideg.benzoic anhydridej.cycloheptanecarboxylic acid

d.propanenitrile
b-valerolactoneBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 722
Problems72339.Name the following compounds:
a.e.h.
b.f.i.
c.g.j.

d.40.What products would be formed from the reaction of benzoyl chloride with the following reagents?
a.sodium acetatee.aqueous NaOHh.4-chlorophenol

b.waterf.cyclohexanoli.isopropyl alcohol

c.dimethylamineg.benzylaminej.aniline

d.aqueous HCl
41.a.List the following esters in order of decreasing reactivity in the first step of a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction
 (formationof the tetrahedral intermediate):b.List the same esters in order of decreasing reactivity in the second step of a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction (colla
pse ofthe tetrahedral intermediate).42.a.Which compound would you expect to have a higher dipole moment,methyl acetate or butanone?
b.Which would you expect to have a higher boiling point?
43.How could you use spectroscopy to distinguish among the following esters?
44.If propionyl chloride is added to one equivalent of methylamine,only a 50% yield of 
N-methylpropanamide is obtained. If,however,the acyl chloride is added to two equivalents of methylamine,the yield of 
N-methylpropanamide is almost 100%. Explain these observations.
45.a.When a carboxylic acid is dissolved in isotopically labeled water the label is incorporated into both oxygens of the
acid. Propose a mechanism to account for this.b.If a carboxylic acid is dissolved in isotopically labeled methanol and an acid catalyst is added,where will the label
reside in the product?46.What reagents would you use to convert methyl propanoate into the following compounds?
a.isopropyl propanoatec.
N-ethylpropanamideb.sodium propanoated.propanoic acid
(CH3 18OH)H2OCH3OH18H2OCH3OH1818COCO(H2O18),ABCD
CH3COCH2CH3OHCOCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH2COCH3OHCOCHCH3OCH31H NMRCH3COCH3methyl acetateOCH3CCH2CH3butanoneOCH3COOCH3COOCH3COCH
3OCH3COCl
OABCD
CH3CH2COCCH2CH3OOCCH3CH2CNHCH2CH2CH3COCCH3OOCH3CH2CH2CH2CNCCH3CH2CH3HCH2COOHCH3CH2CH2CH2CClOCH3CH2COCH2CH2CH3OCH2CHCH2CNHCH3OCH3CH2CH2CN(CH3)2OCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2COHCH2CH3OBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 723
724CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I47.A compound with molecular formula gives the following IR spectrum. When it undergoes acid-catalyzed hydrolysis,
the compound with the following spectrum is formed. Identify the compounds.
48.Aspartame,the sweetener used in the commercial products NutraSweetand Equalis 160 times sweeter than sucrose. What
products would be obtained if aspartame were hydrolyzed completely in an aqueous solution of HCl?
49.a.Which of the following reactions will not give the carbonyl product shown?
6.CH3COCH3OCH3CClOClCH3CNH2OCH3CClOCl3.5.CH
3COCH3OCH3CNHCH3OCH3NH2CH3CClOCH3COCCH3OOCH3COO2.CH3COHOCH3CNHCH3OCH3NH24.CH3COHOCH3COCCH3OOCH3COO1.CH2NH3aspartameOCCH2CHCNHCHCOCH3OOO¨,¨87653210
4(ppm)frequencyOffset: 2.0 ppm2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance1H NMRC5H10O2BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 724
Problems725b.Which of the reactions that do not occur can be made to occur if an acid catalyst is added to the reaction mixture?
50.1,4-Diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (abbreviated DABCO) is a tertiary amine that catalyzes transesterification reactions. Propose 
amechanism to show how it does this.
51.Identify the major and minor products of the following reaction:
52.Two products,A and B,are obtained from the reaction of 1-bromobutane with Compound A reacts with acetyl chloride to
form C,and B reacts with acetyl chloride to form D. The IR spectra of C and D are shown. Identify A,B,C,and D.
53.Phosgene was used as a poison gas in World War I. Give the product that would be formed from the reaction of phosgene
with each of the following reagents:

1.one equivalent of methanol3.excess propylamine

2.excess methanol4.one equivalent of ethanol followed by one equivalent of methylamine
54.When Ethyl Ester treated butanedioic acid with thionyl chloride,she was surprised to find that the product she obtained was 
ananhydride rather than an acyl chloride. Propose a mechanism to explain why she obtained an anhydride.
(COCl2)2.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Compound DWavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance2.540002.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
24002600280030003200340036003800Compound CWavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance2.54000NH3.CH2OHCH2CH3CH3CClNHONN1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octaneDABCOOOOCH3COCH3CH3COCH3CH3OH10.CH3CClOCH3COHOH2O8.CH3CNHCH3OCH3COHOH2O9.CH3CNHCH3OCH3COCCH3OOCH3COO7.BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 725
726CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I55.Give the products of the following reactions:
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.i.
e.j.
56.When treated with an equivalent of methanol,compound A,with molecular formula forms the compound whose
NMR spectrum is shown below. Identify compound A.
57.a.Identify the two products obtained from the following reaction:
b.Eddie Amine carried out the preceding reaction,but stopped it before it was half over,whereupon he isolated the major
product. He was surprised to find that the product he isolated was neither of the products obtained when the reaction was

allowed to go to completion. What product did he isolate?
58.An aqueous solution of a primary or secondary amine reacts with an acyl chloride to form an amide as the major product.
However,if the amine is tertiary,an amide is not formed. What product 
isformed? Explain.59.a.Ann Hydride did not obtain any ester when she added 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoic acid to an acidic solution of methanol. Why?
(Hint:Build models.)b.Would Ann have encountered the same problem if she had tried to synthesize the methyl ester of 
p-methylbenzoic acid in thesame way?
c.How could she prepare the methyl ester of 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoic acid? (
Hint:See Section16.12.)
CH3COCCH3CH3CHCH2CH2OHexcessOONH287653210
4 (ppm)frequency1HC4H6Cl2O,CH3OHexcessHClOOOClCClOHOHONH3excessOOOH2OOOOCH2COHCOH(CH3C)2OOOOCOH1. SOCl22. 2 CH3NH2OCH3CCH2OCCH3CH3OHexcessCH3OOONHH2OHClOOH2OexcessOHClCH3CClKF
OBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 726
Problems72760.When a compound with molecular formula undergoes acid-catalyzed hydrolysis,one of the products that is isolated
gives the following NMR spectrum. Identify the compound.
61.List the following compounds in order of decreasing frequency of the carbon
Ðoxygen double-bond stretch:62.a.If the equilibrium constant for the reaction of acetic acid and ethanol to form ethyl acetate is 4.02,what will be the
concentration of ethyl acetate at equilibrium if the reaction is carried out with equal amounts of acetic acid and ethanol?b.What will be the concentration of ethyl acetate at equilibrium if the reaction is carried out with 10 times more ethanol than
acetic acid? Hint:Recall the quadratic equation:For 
c.What will be the concentration of ethyl acetate at equilibrium if the reaction is carried out with 100 times more ethanol tha
nacetic acid?63.The NMR spectra for two esters with molecular formula are shown below. If each of the esters is added to an aqueous
solution with a pH of 10,which of the esters will be hydrolyzed more completely when the hydrolysis reactions have reached

equilibrium?4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequencyC8H8O21H2412220,CH3COCH3OCH3CClOCH3CHOCH3CNH2O4876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency1HC11H14O2BRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 727
728CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds I64.Show how the following compounds could be prepared from the given starting materials. You can use any necessary organic or
inorganic reagents.
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
65.Is the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of acetamide a reversible or an irreversible reaction? Explain.
66.The reaction of a nitrile with an alcohol in the presence of a strong acid forms a secondary amide. This reaction is known a
s theRitter reaction
. The Ritter reaction does not work with primary alcohols.
a.Propose a mechanism for the Ritter reaction.
b.Why does the Ritter reaction not work with primary alcohols?

c.How does the Ritter reaction differ from the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of a nitrile to form a primary amide?
67.The intermediate shown here is formed during the hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis of the ester group. Propose a mechanism f
orthe reaction.68.What product would you expect to obtain from each of the following reactions?
a.b.c.
OCH2CH2COH1. SOCl22. AlCl33. H2OOCH2OHCH2COCH2CH3HClCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2COHOOHHClCHCHCF
3CH2OHHOH2OCCOCH2CF3OOONCH3HCONCH3HCCCCCH3NOCHCCO
ORCNR
OHRCNHROHthe Ritter reactionCH2COHOCH3CH3(CH2)10COHCH
3(CH2)11SO3 NaOa detergentONH2NH2CH3CCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2COHOOCH3CNHCH3CH3CH2CNH2OCH3CH2CClOBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 728
Problems72969.Sulfonamides,the first antibiotics,were introduced clinically in 1934 (Sections25.8and 30.4). Show how a sulfonamide can be
prepared from benzene.70.a.How could aspirin be synthesized,starting with benzene?
b.Ibuprofen is the active ingredient in pain relievers such as AdvilMotrinand NuprinHow could ibuprofen be synthesized,
starting with benzene?71.The following compound has been found to be an inhibitor of penicillinase. The enzyme can be reactivated by hydroxylamine
Propose a mechanism to account for the inhibition and for the reactivation.
72.For each of the following reactions,propose a mechanism that will account for the formation of the product:
a.b.73.Show how Novocain
¨,a painkiller used frequently by dentists (Section30.3),can be prepared from benzene.
74.Catalytic antibodies catalyze a reaction by binding to the transition state,thereby stabilizing it. As a result,the energy o
f activation
is lowered and the reaction goes faster. The synthesis of the antibody is carried out in the presence of a transition state ana
logÑaNCH2CH2OCCH3CH2CH3CH2NH2ONovocainOHONO2OSH3CCH3O NaNO2OO NaOSH3CNO2NO2HONHCO2CH3CO2CH3NHClOOCH2CNHCH2POCOOO(NH2OH).OCOHOCCH3OaspirinOCHCOHCH3CHCH2CH3CH3ibuprofen¨.¨,¨,H2NSNHR
OOa sulfonamideBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 729
730CHAPTER 17Car
bonyl Compounds Istable molecule that structurally resembles the transition state. This causes an antibody to be generated that will recognize a
nd bindto the transition state. For example,the following transition state analog has been used to generate a catalytic antibody that

catalyzes the hydrolysis of the structurally similar ester:a.Draw the transition state for the hydrolysis reaction.
b.The following transition state analog is used to generate a catalytic antibody for the catalysis of ester hydrolysis. Give th
estructure of an ester whose rate of hydrolysis would be increased by this catalytic antibody.
c.Design a transition state analog that would catalyze amide hydrolysis at the amide group indicated.
75.Saccharin,an artificial sweetener,is about 300 times sweeter than sucrose. Describe how saccharin could be prepared,using
benzene as the starting material.76.Information about the mechanism of reaction of a series of substituted benzenes can be obtained by plotting the logarithm of
 theobserved rate constant obtained at a particular pH against the Hammett substituent constant for the particular substituent. The
value for hydrogen is 0. Electron-donating substituents have negative values; electron-withdrawing substituents have positive

values. The more strongly electron donating the substituent,the more negative its value will be; the more strongly electron
withdrawing the substituent,the more positive value its value will be. The slope of a plot of the logarithm of the rate constan
tversus is called the (rho) value. The value for the hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis of a series of meta-and para-

substituted ethyl benzoates is the value for amide formation for the reaction of a series of meta-and para-substituted

anilines with benzoyl chloride is 

a.Why does one set of experiments give a positive value while the other set of experiments gives a negative value?

b.Why do you think that ortho-substituted compounds were not included in the experiment?

c.What would you predict the sign of the value to be for the ionization of a series of meta-and para-substituted benzoic acids?
rrr2.78.r2.46;rrssssss(s)OOOsaccharinNHCSCHONHOOONHNO2hydrolyze hereOOONNO2POOOHONO2transition state analogPOOHONO2COOOHHO
HONO2COOH2OBRUI17-669_730r3  28-03-2003  2:25 PM  Page 730
In Section17.0,wesaw that carbonyl com-
poundsÑcompounds that possess a carbonyl

group Ñcan be divided into two
classes:Class I carbonyl compounds,which have a

group that can be replaced by a nucleophile,and

Class II carbonyl compounds,which comprise aldehydes

and ketones. Unlike Class I carbonyl compounds,Class II carbonyl compounds do not

have a group that can be replaced by a nucleophile.
The carbonyl carbon of the simplest aldehyde,formaldehyde,is bonded to two
hydrogens. The carbonyl carbon in all other 
aldehydes
is bonded to a hydrogen and to
an alkyl (or an aryl) group. The carbonyl carbon of a 
ketone
is bonded to two alkyl (or
aryl) groups. Aldehydes and ketones 
do not havea group that can be replaced byanother group,because hydride ions and carbanions and are too basic to be

displaced by nucleophiles under normal conditions.The physical properties of aldehydes and ketones are discussed in Section17.3(see
also AppendixI),and the methods used to prepare aldehydes and ketones are summa-

rized in AppendixIV.
Many compounds found in nature have aldehyde or ketone functional groups.
Aldehydes have pungent odors,whereas ketones tend to smell sweet. Vanillin and

cinnamaldehyde are examples of naturally occurring aldehydes. A whiff of vanilla

extract will allow you to appreciate the pungent odor of vanilla. The ketones carvone

and camphor are responsible for the characteristic sweet odors of spearmint leaves,

caraway seeds,and the camphor tree.
OCCC
HHRRR'
HformaldehydeOan aldehydeOa ketone(R)(H)(CO)18Carbonyl Compounds IINucleophilic Acyl Addition, Nucleophilic AcylSubstitution, and Nucleophilic AdditionÐElimination ¥
Reactions of ,-Unsaturated Carbonyl Compounds
ba731formaldehydeacetaldehydeacetone
formaldehydeacetaldehydeacetoneBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 731
732CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIIn ketosis,a pathological condition that can occur in people with diabetes,the body
produces more acetoacetate than can be metabolized. The excess acetoacetate breaks

down to acetone
Ña ketone
Ñand Ketosis can be recognized by the smell of ace-
tone on a personÕs breath.Two ketones that are of biological importance illustrate how a small difference in
structure can be responsible for a large difference in biological activity:Progesterone

is a female sex hormone synthesized primarily in the ovaries,whereas testosterone is a

male sex hormone synthesized primarily in the testes.
18.1Nomenclature
AldehydesThe systematic name of an aldehyde is obtained by replacing the terminal 
ÒeÓfrom thename of the parent hydrocarbon with 
Òal.ÓFor example,a one-carbon aldehyde is
methanal; a two-carbon aldehyde is ethan
al. The position of the carbonyl carbon does
not have to be designated,because it is always at the end of the parent hydrocarbon

and therefore always has the 1-position.
The common name of an aldehyde is the same as the common name of the corre-
sponding carboxylic acid (Section17.1),except that 
ÒaldehydeÓis substituted for ÒicacidÓ(or Òoic acidÓ). When common names are used,the position of a substituent is
designated by a lowercase Greek letter. The carbonyl carbon is not designated; the car-

bon adjacent to the carbonyl carbon is the 
HHH
HBrsystematic name:common name:methanalformaldehydeCH3ethanalacetaldehydeCH3CH2-bromopropanal-bromopropionaldehydeCOCOCOa-carbon.progesteronea female sex hormoneOCH3CHHOOHHHCH3CH3testosteronea male sex hormoneOHH3CHCH3acetoacetateacetone
CH3CH2CH3CH3OCO2COCOCOCO2.vanillinvanilla flavoringcinnamaldehydecinnamon flavoringOCHHOCHCHCHOCH3H3CCH
2OCH3(R)-()-carvonespearmint oilOCH3CCH
2CCH3(S)-()-carvonecaraway seed oilOOCH3CH3H3CcamphorBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 732
Section 18.1Nomenclature
733Notice that the terminal ÒeÓis not removed in hexanedial; the 
ÒeÓis removed only to
avoid two successive vowels.
If the aldehyde group is attached to a ring,the aldehyde is named by adding
ÒcarbaldehydeÓto the name of the cyclic compound.
In Section8.1,we saw that a carbonyl group has a higher nomenclature priority
than an alcohol or an amine group. However,all carbonyl compounds do not have the

same priority. The nomenclature priorities of the various carbonyl groups are shown

in Table18.1.
If a compound has two functional groups,the one with the lower priority is indicated
by its prefix. The prefix of an aldehyde oxygen that is part of the parent hydrocarbon is

Òoxo.ÓThe prefix of a one-carbon aldehyde group that is not part of the parent hydrocar-
bon is Òformyl.ÓHCOCH3Htrans-2-methylcyclohexanecarbaldehydebenzenecarbaldehyde
benzaldehydesystematic name:common name:COincreasingpriorityTable 18.1
Summary of Functional Group Nomenclature
ClassCarboxylic acidEster
AmideNitrileAldehydeKetone
Alcohol
Amine
Alkene

Alkyne

Alkane
Ether
Alkyl halide
Suffix Name
-oic acid-oate
-amide-nitrile-alAldehyde-al
-one-ol
-amine
-ene
-yne
-ane
Ñ
ÑPrefix Name
CarboxyAlkoxycarbonyl

AmidoCyanoFormyl
OxoHydroxy
Amino
Alkenyl

Alkynyl

Alkyl

Alkoxy

HaloCH(O)(O)Oxo(O)HCHOCH
3Oethyl 4-formylhexanoateOOCH3CH2CHCH2CH2OCH2CH33-hydroxybutanalmethyl 5-oxopentanoate
CH3CHCH2HCOOHCOCH3CHCH2CH3CHCH2HCOHHHCOsystematic name:common name:3-chlorobutanal-chlorobutyraldehyde3-methylbutanalisovaleraldehydeClCH3OOhexanedialBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 733
734CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIIf the compound has both an alkene and an aldehyde functional group,the alkene is
cited first,with the 
ÒeÓending omitted to avoid two successive vowels (Section8.1).
KetonesThe systematic name of a ketone is obtained by removing the 
ÒeÓfrom the name of the
parent hydrocarbon and adding 
Òone.ÓThe chain is numbered in the direction that
gives the carbonyl carbon the smaller number. In the case of cyclic ketones,a number

is not necessary because the carbonyl carbon is assumed to be at the 1-position.

Frequently,derived names are used for ketones
Ñthe substituents attached to the
carbonyl group are cited in alphabetical order,followed by 
Òketone.
ÓOnly a few ketones have common names. The smallest ketone,propanone,is usual-
ly referred to by its common name,acetone. Acetone is a common laboratory solvent.

Common names are also used for some phenyl-substituted ketones; the number of car-

bons (other than those of the phenyl group) is indicated by the common name of the

corresponding carboxylic acid,substituting 
ÒophenoneÓfor Òic acid.ÓIf the ketone has a second functional group of higher naming priority,the ketone
oxygen is indicated by the prefix 
Òoxo.ÓOOOOsystematic name:4-oxopentanalmethyl 3-oxobutanoate2-(3-oxopentyl)-
cyclohexanoneOCH3OOH3-pentenalCH3CHCHCH
2HCOpropanoneacetonedimethyl ketonesystematic name:common name:
derived name:3-hexanoneethyl propyl ketone6-methyl-2-heptanoneisohexyl methyl ketoneCH3CH3COCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3COCH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH3COCH3CCH3OCH3CH2CH3CH3CHCHCH
2butanedionecyclohexanonesystematic name:common name:2,4-pentanedioneacetylacetone4-hexen-2-oneCOOCOCH3COCOCH3acetophenonemethyl phenyl ketonebutyrophenonephenyl propyl ketonebenzophenonediphenyl ketonecommon name:derived name:COCH2CH2CH3COCOTutorial:
Nomenclature of aldehydes
and ketonesBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 734
formaldehydeacetaldehydeacetoneSection 18.2Relative Reactivities of Carbonyl Compounds
735BUTANEDIONE: AN UNPLEASANT COMPOUND
Fresh perspiration is odorless. Bacteria that are always present on our
skin produce lactic acid,thereby creating an acidic environment that
allows other bacteria to break down the components of perspiration,producing com-

pounds with the unappealing odors we associate with armpits and sweaty feet. One

such compound is butanedione.
CH3CCH3butanedioneCOOPROBLEM 1Why are numbers not used to designate the positions of the functional groups in propanone
and butanedione?
PROBLEM 2Give two names for each of the following compounds:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 3Name the following compounds:
a.b.c.
18.2Relative Reactivities of Carbonyl CompoundsWe have seen that the carbonyl group is polar because oxygen,being more electronega-
tive than carbon,has a greater share of the electrons of the double bond (Section17.5).

The partial positive charge on the carbonyl carbon causes carbonyl compounds to be

attacked by nucleophiles. The electron deficiency of the carbonyl carbon is indicated by

the blue areas in the electrostatic potential maps.An aldehyde has a greater partial positive charge on its carbonyl carbon than does a
ketone because a hydrogen is electron withdrawing compared with an alkyl group

(Section4.2). An aldehyde,therefore,is less stable than a ketone,which makes it more

reactive toward nucleophilic attack.
CORR(H)
NuCH3CH2CHCH2CNH2OHCO
CNOCH3CHCH2CH2CCH2CH3OOHCHCCH2CH2CH2CH3CH2OCH3CHCH2CCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CHOCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CCH2CH2CH3OCH2CH2CH2CHOCH3CH2CHCH2CHOCH3BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 735
736CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II3-D Molecules:Formaldehyde;
Acetaldehyde;
Acetone3-D Molecules:3-Methyl-2-butanone;
2,4-Dimethyl-3-pentanoneSteric factors also contribute to the greater reactivity of an aldehyde. The carbonyl car-
bon of an aldehyde is more accessible to the nucleophile than is the carbonyl carbon of

a ketone because the hydrogen attached to the carbonyl carbon of an aldehyde is

smaller than the alkyl group attached to the carbonyl carbon of a ketone. Steric factors

also become important in the tetrahedral transition state because the bond angles are
109.5¡; therefore,the alkyl groups are closer to one another than they are in the car-
bonyl compound,in which the bond angles are 120
¡. Ketones have greater steric
crowding in their transition states,so they have less stable transition states than alde-

hydes have.
For the same reason,ketones with small alkyl groups bonded to the carbonyl carbon
are more reactive than ketones with large alkyl groups.
PROBLEM 4Whichketone is more reactive?
a.2-heptanone or 4-heptanone
b.p-nitroacetophenone or p-methoxyacetophenoneHow does the reactivity of an aldehyde or a ketone toward nucleophiles com-
pare with the reactivity of the carbonyl compounds whose reactions you studied in

Chapter17? Aldehydes and ketones are right in the middle
Ñless reactive than
acyl halides and acid anhydrides,but more reactive than esters,carboxylic acids,

and amides.The carbonyl compounds discussed in Chapter17have a lone pair on an atom at-
tached to the carbonyl group that can be shared with the carbonyl carbon by reso-

nance,which makes the carbonyl carbon less electron deficient. We have seen that the

reactivity of these carbonyl compounds is related to the basicity of (Section17.5).

The weaker the basicity of the more reactive is the carbonyl group because weak

bases are less able to donate electrons by resonance to the carbonyl carbon and are bet-

ter able to withdraw electrons inductively from the carbonyl carbon.
CORCRYOYY,Yrelative reactivitiesCOCOCOmost reactiveleast reactiveH3CH3CCH
3CHCH3CH3CH3CHCH3CH3CHCH3relative reactivitiesHHRR'
formaldehydean aldehydea ketone
CORHCOCOmost reactiveleast reactiveAldehydes and ketones are less reactive
than acyl chlorides and acid anhydrides,
but are more reactive than esters and

amides.relative reactivities of carbonyl compounds toward nucleophilesmost reactiveleast reactiveacyl halide    acid anhydride    aldehyde    ketone    ester    carboxylic acid    amide    carboxylate ion BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 736
Section 18.3How Aldehydes and Ketones React
737Aldehydes and ketones undergonucleophilic addition reactions with

hydride ion and with carbon
nucleophiles.Consequently,aldehydes and ketones are not as reactive as carbonyl compounds in
which is a very weak base (acyl halides and acid anhydrides),but are more reactive

than carbonyl compounds in which is a relatively strong base (carboxylic acids,es-

ters,and amides). A molecular orbital explanation of why resonance electron donation

decreases the reactivity of the carbonyl group is given in Section17.15.
18.3How Aldehydes and Ketones ReactIn Section17.5,we saw that the carbonyl group of a carboxylic acid or a carboxylic
acid derivative is attached to a group that can be replaced by another group. These

compounds therefore react with nucleophiles to form substitution products.In contrast,the carbonyl group of an aldehyde or a ketone is attached to a group that is
too strong a base (or ) to be eliminated under normal conditions,so it cannot be

replaced by another group. Consequently,aldehydes and ketones react with nucleo-

philes to form addition products,not substitution products. Thus,aldehydes and

ketones undergo 
nucleophilic additionreactions,whereas carboxylic acid derivatives
undergo 
nucleophilic acyl substitutionreactions.When a nucleophile adds to a carbonyl group,the hybridization of the carbonyl
carbon changes from in the carbonyl compound to in the addition product. In

Section17.5,we saw that a compound that has an carbon bonded to an oxygen

atom generally will be unstable if the carbon is also bonded to another elec-

tronegative atom. Therefore,if the nucleophile that adds to the aldehyde or ketone is

one in which Z 
is not
electronegative (Z is an H or a C nucleophile),the tetrahedral
addition product will be stable. It will be an alkoxide ion that can be protonated either

by the solvent or by added acid. (is any species that provides a proton; is any

species that removes a proton.)
If,on the other hand,the nucleophile that adds to the aldehyde or ketone is one in
which Z 
iselectronegative (Z is an O or an N nucleophile),the tetrahedral addition
COCR'
ORRR'Zsp2sp3product of nucleophilicaddition is stable;
Z  C or HCR'
OHRZHBBZBHBsp3sp3sp3sp2COCR'
OHRRR'ZHZproduct ofnucleophilicadditionRHZCOCYRORYCORZZYproduct ofnucleophilicsubstitutionYYCarboxylic acid derivatives undergonucleophilic substitution reactions

with nucleophiles.BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 737
738CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIproduct will notbe stable. Water will be eliminated from the addition product. This is
called a nucleophilic additionÐelimination reaction
. We will see that the fate of the
dehydrated product depends on the identity of Z.18.4Reactions of Carbonyl Compoundswith Carbon NucleophilesFew reactions in organic chemistry result in the formation of new bonds. Con-
sequently,those reactions that do are very important to synthetic organic chemists

when they need to synthesize larger organic molecules from smaller molecules. The

addition of a carbon nucleophile to a carbonyl compound is an example of a reaction

that forms a new bond and therefore forms a product with more carbon atoms

than the starting material.Reaction with Grignard Reagents
Addition of a Grignard reagent to a carbonyl compound is a versatile reaction that

leads to the formation of a new bond. The reaction can produce compounds

with a variety of structures because both the structure of the carbonyl compound and

the structure of the Grignard reagent can be varied. In Section12.11,we saw that a

Grignard reagent can be prepared by adding an alkyl halide to magnesium shavings in

diethyl ether. We also saw that a Grignard reagent reacts as if it were a carbanion.
Attack of a Grignard reagent on a carbonyl carbon forms an alkoxide ion that is
complexed with magnesium ion. Addition of water or dilute acid breaks up the com-

plex. When a Grignard reagent reacts with formaldehyde,the addition product is a pri-

mary alcohol.When a Grignard reagent reacts with an aldehyde other than formaldehyde,the addi-
tion product is a secondary alcohol.MgEt2OCH3CH2BrCH
3CH2MgBrCH3CH2MgBrCH
3CH2reacts as if it wereMgBrCCCCCCAldehydes and ketones undergonucleophilic additionÐelimination
reactions with oxygen and nitrogen

nucleophiles.RCOHR'ZZRCOHR'ZRCR'H2OBHBHproduct of nucleophilicaddition is not stable;
Z  O or Nproduct of nucleophilicadditionÐeliminationCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OHMgBrMgBrH3OHHCObutylmagnesiumbromideformaldehyde1Ðpentanola primary alcoholan alkoxide ionCH3CH2CH2MgBrOMgBr
H3OCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3propanalpropylmagnesium
bromide3-hexanola secondary alcoholCH3CH2HCOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 738
Section 18.4Reactions of Carbonyl Compounds with Carbon Nucleophiles
739Movie:Reactions of Grignard
reagents with ketonesWhen a Grignard reagent reacts with a ketone,the addition product is a tertiary alcohol.
In the following reactions,numbers are used with the reagents to indicate that the
acid is not added until the reaction with the Grignard reagent is complete:A Grignard reagent can also react with carbon dioxide. The product of the reaction
is a carboxylic acid with one more carbon atom than the Grignard reagent has.PROBLEM 5a.How many isomers are obtained from the reaction of 2-pentanone with ethylmagne-
sium bromide followed by treatment with aqueous acid?
b.How many isomers are obtained from the reaction of 2-pentanone with methylmagne-
sium bromide followed by treatment with aqueous acid?
PROBLEM 6We saw that 3-methyl-3-hexanol can be synthesized from the reaction of 2-pentanone with

ethylmagnesium bromide. What two other combinations of ketone and Grignard reagent

could be used to prepare the same tertiary alcohol?In addition to reacting with aldehydes and ketones
ÑClass II carbonyl compounds
ÑGrignard reagents react with Class I carbonyl compounds
Ñcarbonyl compounds that
have groups that can be replaced by another group.
Class I carbonyl compounds undergo two successive reactions with the Grignard
reagent. For example,when an ester reacts with a Grignard reagent,the first reaction is a

nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction
because an ester,unlike an aldehyde or a ketone,
has a group that can be replaced by the Grignard reagent. The product of the reaction is

a ketone. The reaction does not stop at the ketone stage,however,because ketones are

more reactive than esters toward nucleophilic attack (Section18.2). Reaction of the

ketone with a second molecule of the Grignard reagent forms a tertiary alcohol. Because

the tertiary alcohol is formed as a result of two successive reactions with a Grignard

reagent,the alcohol has two identical groups bonded to the tertiary carbon.
1.  CH3MgBr2.  H3OOHCH3CH2CCH2CH3CH3MgBr1.2. H3OOHCH3CH2CH2CH3-pentanone3-methyl-3-pentanolbutanal1-phenyl-1-butanol
CH3CH2CH2CH3COCOCH3CH2CH2H2-pentanoneethylmagnesiumbromideOCH2CH3CH2CH3MgBr3-methyl-3-hexanola tertiary alcoholCH3CH2CH3CCH2CH2CH3OHCH3CCH2CH2CH3MgBrH3OCH3CH2CH2CH3COcarbondioxidepropylmagnesiumbromidebutanoic acidH3OOCOCH
3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2OHMgBrOMgBrCOCOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 739
740CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IITertiary alcohols are also formed from the reaction of two equivalents of a Grignard
reagent with an acyl halide.
In theory,we should be able to stop this reaction at the ketone stage because a ketone
is less reactive than an acyl halide. However,the Grignard reagent is so reactive that it

can be prevented from reacting with the ketone only under very carefully controlled

conditions. There are better ways to synthesize ketones (AppendixIV).
PROBLEM 7What product would be obtained from the reaction of one equivalent of a carboxylic acid
with one equivalent of a Grignard reagent?
PROBLEM 8SOLVED
a.Which of the following tertiary alcohols cannot be prepared from the reaction of an
ester with excess Grignard reagent?
1.3.5.
2.4.6.
b.For those alcohols that can be prepared by the reaction of an ester with excess Grignard
reagent,what ester and what Grignard reagent should be used?
SOLUTION TO 8a
A tertiary alcohol is obtained from the reaction of an ester with two
equivalents of a Grignard reagent. Therefore,tertiary alcohols prepared in this way must

have two identical substituents on the carbon to which the OH is bonded,because two
OHCH3COHCH3CH3CH2CCH2CH3OHCH3CH3CCH2CH3OHCH2CH3CH3CCH2CH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH3CCH3butyryl chloride3-ethyl-3-hexanol1.  2 CH3CH2MgBrH3O2.CH3CH2CH2ClOHCH3CH2CH2CCH2CH3CH2CH3COMovie:Reaction of a Grignard
reagent with an esterH3Oan estera ketone
a tertiary alcoholCH3MgBrCH3OOCH3MgBrCH3CH2COCH
3OCH3MgBrCH3CH2CCH3OHCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3MgBrmechanism for the reaction of an ester with a Grignard reagentCOCH3CH2OCH3COCH3CH2CH3product of nucleophilic
additionproduct of 
nucleophilic acyl
substitutionTutorial:
Grignard reagents in synthesisBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 740
Section 18.4Reactions of Carbonyl Compounds with Carbon Nucleophiles
741substituents come from the Grignard reagent. Alcohols (3)and (5)cannot be prepared in
this way because they do not have two identical substituents.
SOLUTION TO 8b(2)Methyl propanoate and excess methylmagnesium bromide.
PROBLEM 9Which of the following secondary alcohols can be prepared from the reaction of methyl

formate with excess Grignard reagent?
Reaction with Acetylide IonsWe have seen that a terminal alkyne can be converted into an acetylide ion by a strong
base (Section6.9).
An acetylide ion is another example of a carbon nucleophile that reacts with carbonyl
compounds. When the reaction is over,a weak acid (one that will not react with the

triple bond,such as pyridinium ion),is added to the reaction mixture to protonate the

alkoxide ion.
PROBLEM 10Show how the following compounds could be prepared,using ethyne as one of the starting
materials. Explain why ethyne should be alkylated before,rather than after,nucleophilic

addition.a.1-pentyn-3-olc.2-methyl-3-hexyn-2-ol
b.1-phenyl-2-butyn-1-ol
Reaction with Hydrogen Cyanide
Hydrogen cyanide adds to aldehydes and ketones to form 
cyanohydrins
. This reaction
forms a product with one more carbon atom than the reactant. In the first step of the

reaction,the cyanide ion attacks the carbonyl carbon. The alkoxide ion then accepts a

proton from an undissociated molecule of hydrogen cyanide.
Because hydrogen cyanide is a toxic gas,the best way to carry out this reaction is to
generate hydrogen cyanide during the reaction by adding HCl to a mixture of the alde-

hyde or ketone and excess sodium cyanide. Excess sodium cyanide is used in order to

make sure that some cyanide ion is available to act as a nucleophile.
NaNH2NH3CH3CCHCH
3CCOHCH3CH2CHCH3OHCH3CHCH3OHCH3CHCH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH2CHCH2CH3OONHCH3CH2HCH3CCH
3CH2CHCOHCH3CH2CHCCCCH3CCH3Cacetone cyanohydrinacetoneCOOCH3HCN
CCH
3CCCH3OHCH3CCNNNCNCH3CH3BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 741
Compared with other carbon nucleophiles,cyanide ion is a relatively weak base
(the of is 9.14,the of is 25,the of is 50),

which means that the cyano group is the most easily eliminated of the carbon nucleo-

philes from the addition product. Cyanohydrins,however,are stable because the OH

group will not eliminate the cyano group; the transition state for the elimination reac-

tion would be relatively unstable since the oxygen atom would bear a partial positive

charge. If the OH group loses its proton,however,the cyano group will be eliminated

because the oxygen atom would have a partial negative charge instead of a partial pos-

itive charge in the transition state of the elimination reaction. Therefore,in basic solu-

tions,a cyanohydrin is converted back to the carbonyl compound.
Cyanide ion does not react with esters because the cyanide ion is a weaker base
than an alkoxide ion,so the cyanide ion would be eliminated from the tetrahedral

intermediate.The addition of hydrogen cyanide to aldehydes and ketones is a synthetically useful
reaction because of the subsequent reactions that can be carried out on the cyanohydrin.

For example,the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of a cyanohydrin forms an -hydroxycar-

boxylic acid (Section17.18).
The catalytic addition of hydrogen to a cyanohydrin produces a primary amine with an
OH group on the -carbon.
PROBLEM 11Can a cyanohydrin be prepared by treating a ketone with sodium cyanide?
PROBLEM 12Explain why aldehydes and ketones react with a weak acid such as hydrogen cyanide in the
presence of but do not react with strong acids such as HCl or in the pres-

ence of or 
PROBLEM 13SOLVED
How can the following compounds be prepared,starting with a carbonyl compound with
one fewer carbon atoms than the desired product?
a.b.
OCH3CHCOHOHHOCH2CH2NH2HSO4 .ClH2SO4CN,H2OHCH3CH2CH2CHCOHCH3CH2CH2CHCH2NH2NPtba cyanohydrinan 
-hydroxy carboxylic acidHCl, H2OOHOHCH2CH3CH3CH2CCN
OCH2CH3CH3CH2CCOH
aH2OHOHOCNOCNCNOcyclohexanonecyanohydrinCH3CH3paHCCHpaHCNpa742CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 742
SOLUTION TO 13a
The starting material for the synthesis of the two-carbon com-
pound must be formaldehyde. Addition of hydrogen cyanide followed by addition of to

the triple bond of the cyanohydrin forms the desired compound.
SOLUTION TO 13b
The starting material for the synthesis of the three-carbon -hy-
droxycarboxylic acid must be ethanal. Addition of hydrogen cyanide,followed by hydrolysis

of the cyanohydrin,forms the target molecule.
18.5Reactions of Carbonyl Compoundswith Hydride IonAddition of hydride ion to an aldehyde or ketone forms an alkoxide ion. Subsequent
protonation by an acid produces an alcohol. The overall reaction adds to the car-

bonyl group. Recall that the addition of hydrogen to an organic compound is a

reduction reaction
(Section4.8).
Aldehydes and ketones are generally reduced using sodium borohydride as the
source of hydride ion.Aldehydes are reduced to primary alcohols,and ketones are

reduced to secondary alcohols. Notice that the acid is not added to the reaction mixture

until the reaction with the hydride donor is complete.PROBLEM 14What alcohols are obtained from the reduction of the following compounds with sodium
borohydride?a.2-methylpropanalc.benzaldehyde
b.cyclohexanoned.acetophenone
1.  NaBH4butanalan aldehydeCH3CH2CH2H1-butanola primary alcoholCH3CH2CH2CH2OH1.  NaBH4H3O2.H3O2.OH2-pentanonea ketoneCH3CH2CH2CH32-pentanola secondary alcoholCH3CH2CH2CHCH3COCO(NaBH4)RR'
HRCOR'HOHRCR'
HBHBCOH2OHOH
OCH3CHCCH
3CHCOHNNaCHClNHCl, H2OCH3CHOaOHCHHOCH
2CHOCH
2CH2NH2NNaCHClNH2PtH2Section 18.5Reactions of Carbonyl Compounds with Hydride Ion
743BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 743
diisobutylaluminumhydrideDIBALHCH3CHCH2CH2CHCH3AlCH3CH3H744CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIEsters undergo two successive reactions
with hydride ion and with Grignard

reagents.
The reaction of a Class I carbonyl compound (i.e.,a carbonyl compound with a
group that can be replaced by another group) with hydride ion involves two successive

reactions with the nucleophile. (Recall that Class I carbonyl compounds also undergo

two successive reactions with a Grignard reagent; see Section18.4.) Sodium borohy-

dride is not a sufficiently strong hydride donor to react with the less reactive

(compared with aldehydes and ketones) esters,carboxylic acids,and amides,so esters,

carboxylic acids,and amides must be reduced with lithium aluminum hydride
a more reactive hydride donor.
Because lithium aluminum hydride is more reactive than sodium borohydride,it is
not as safe or as easy to use. Since it reacts violently with protic solvents,lithium alu-

minum hydride must be used in a dry,aprotic solvent.
The reactionof an ester with produces two alcohols,one corresponding to
the acyl portion of the ester and one corresponding to the alkyl portion.
When an ester reacts with hydride ion,the first reaction is a nucleophilic acyl
substitution reaction because an ester has a group that can be substituted by hydride
ion. The product of this reaction is an aldehyde. The aldehyde then undergoes a

nucleophilic addition reaction with a second equivalent of hydride ion,forming an

alkoxide ion,which when protonated gives a primary alcohol. The reaction cannot

be stopped at the aldehyde stage because an aldehyde is more reactive than an ester

toward nucleophilic attack.
Chemists have found that if diisobutylaluminum hydride (DIBALH) is used as the
hydride donor at a low temperature,the reaction can be stopped after the addition of

one equivalent of hydride ion. This reagent,therefore,makes it possible to convert es-

ters into aldehydes,which is initially surprising,since aldehydes are more reactive

than esters toward hydride ion.
1-propanolmethanol
methyl propanoatean ester1.  LiAlH42.  H3OCH3CH2OCH3CH3CH2CH2OHCH3OHCOLiAlH4(LiAlH4),(NaBH4)3-D Molecule:Methyl propanoateCOCH3CH2HH3OHAlH
3an estermechanism for the reaction of an ester with hydride ionan aldehydea primary alcoholHAlH
3CH3OOHCH3CH2COCH
3OHCH3CH2CHCH3CH2CH2OHCOCH3CH2OCH3product ofnucleophilic
additionproduct of nucleophilic
acyl substitution1.  [(CH3)2CHCH2]2AlH, 78 C2.  H2OCH3CH2CH2CH2OCH3CH3OHmethyl pentanoatepentanalCOCH3CH2CH2CH2HCOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 744
Section 18.5Reactions of Carbonyl Compounds with Hydride Ion
745The reaction is carried out at (the temperature of a dry ice
Ðacetone bath). At
this cold temperature,the initially formed tetrahedral intermediate is stable,so it does

not eliminate the alkoxide ion. All of the unreacted hydride donor is removed from the

solution before the solution warms up. Therefore,when the tetrahedral intermediate

eliminates the alkoxide ion,there is no reducing agent to react with the aldehyde. If,

however,the reaction is carried out at room temperature,a primary alcohol is

obtainedÑthe same product obtained when an ester reacts with The reaction of a carboxylic acid with forms a single primary alcohol.
In the first step of the reaction,a hydride ion reacts with the acidic hydrogen of the
carboxylic acid,forming and a carboxylate ion. We have seen that nucleophiles do

not react with carboxylate ions because of their negative charge. However,in this case,

an electrophile is present that accepts a pair of electrons from the carboxylate

ion and forms a new hydride donor. Then,analogous to the reduction of an ester by
two successive additions of hydride ion take place,with an aldehyde being
formed as an intermediate on the way to the primary alcohol.
Acyl chlorides,like esters and carboxylic acids,undergo two successive additions
of hydride ion when treated with Amides also undergo two successive additions of hydride ion when they react with
The product of the reaction is an amine. Primary,secondary,or tertiary
amines can be formed,depending on the number of substituents bonded to the nitrogen
LiAlH4.CO1.  LiAlH42.  H3OCH3CH2CH2ClCH3CH2CH2CH2OHbutanoyl chloride1-butanolLiAlH4.LiAlH4,(AlH3)H2acetic acidethanolbenzoic acidbenzyl alcohol1.  LiAlH4OHCH3CH3CH2OH1.  LiAlH42.  H3O2.  H3OOHCH2OHCOCOLiAlH4LiAlH4.78¡ C3-D Molecule:Diisobutylaluminum hydrideH3OOa carboxylic acidmechanism for the reaction of a carboxylic acid with hydride ionan alcoholan aldehydeCH3COHH
H2AlH3AlH3OCH3COAlH
2CH3CHOOHHHAlCH3COOOCH3CH2OAlH2OCH3CHCH3CH2OHHAlH
3hydride ionremoves an
acidic protonnew hydridedonorsecond addition
of hydride ionBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 745
746CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIof the amide. Overall,the reaction converts a carbonyl group into a methylene group.
(Notice that rather than is used in the second step of the reaction. The prod-

uct,therefore,is an amine rather than an ammonium ion.)
The mechanism of the reaction shows why the product of the reaction is an amine.
Take a minute to note the similarities between the mechanisms for the reaction of

hydride ion with an N-substituted amide and with a carboxylic acid.The mechanisms for the reaction of with unsubstituted and 
N,N-disubstitutedamines are somewhat different,but have the same result:the conversion of a carbonyl

group into a methylene group.PROBLEM 15What amides would you treat with in order to prepare the following amines?
a.benzylmethylaminec.diethylamine
b.ethylamined.triethylamine
PROBLEM 16Starting with N-benzylbenzamide,how would you make the following compounds?
a.dibenzylaminec.benzaldehyde
b.benzoic acidd.benzyl alcohol
LiAlH4LiAlH4ONCH3N-methyl--butyrolactamN-methylpyrrolidinea tertiary amine1.  LiAlH42.  H2ONCH3benzamidebenzylaminea primary amine1.  LiAlH42.  H2ONH2CH2NH2N-methylacetamideethylmethylaminea secondary amine1.  LiAlH42.  H2OCH3NHCH3CH3CH2NHCH3COCOH3OH2OH2OOan amidemechanism for the reaction of an N-substituted amide with hydride ionan amineCH3CNCH
3HHNCH3NCH3NCH3H2AlH3AlH3OCH3COAlH
2CH3CHCH3CNCH3CH3CH2NCH3AlH2OCH3CHCH3CH2NHCH3HOHAlH
3OHHHAlhydride ionremoves a protonnew hydridedonorsecond addition
of hydride ionBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 746
Section 18.6Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Nitrogen Nucleophiles
74718.6Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketoneswith Nitrogen Nucleophiles
Aldehydes and ketones react with a 
primaryamine to form an imine. An 
imineis a compound with a carbon
Ðnitrogen double bond. The imine obtained from the
reaction of a carbonyl compound and a primary amine is often called a 
Schiff base.The orbital model of a group (Figure18.1) is similar to the orbital model of a
group (Figure17.1 on p. 676). The imine nitrogen is hybridized. One 
of its orbitals forms a bond with the imine carbon,one forms a bond with a sub-

stituent,and the third contains a lone pair. The 
porbital of nitrogen and the porbital ofcarbon overlap to form a bond.
psssp2sp2COCNCCORHRNH2H2Oan aldehyde ora ketonea primary aminean imine 
a Schiff baseCCHN(RNH2)NCCCCFigure 18.1
Bonding in an imineAldehydes and ketones react with a 
secondary amineto form an enamine (pro-
nounced ÒENE-amineÓ). An enamineis an -unsaturated tertiary amine
Ña tertiaryamine with a double bond in the -position relative to the nitrogen atom.Notice that

the double bond is in the part of the molecule that comes from the aldehyde or ketone.

The name ÒenamineÓcomes from ÒeneÓÒamine,Ówith the ÒeÓomitted in order toavoid two successive vowels.
When you first look at the products of imine and enamine formation,they appear to
be quite different. However,when you look at the mechanisms for the reactions,you

will see that the mechanisms are exactly the same except for the site from which a pro-

ton is lost in the last step of the reaction.Addition of Primary AminesAldehydes and ketones react with primary amines to form imines. The reaction requires

a catalytic (small) amount of acidÑwe will see that the pH of the reaction mixture mustbe carefully controlled.CORHRRRNHH
2Oan aldehyde ora ketonea secondary aminean enamine 
CCNCa,ba,bBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 747
748CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIrepresents any species in the
solution that is capable of donating a
proton, and represents any species in

the solution that is capable of removing

a proton.
BHBIn the first step of the mechanism for imine formation,the amine attacks the car-
bonyl carbon. Gain of a proton by the alkoxide ion and loss of a proton by the ammo-

nium ion forms a neutral tetrahedral intermediate. The neutral tetrahedral intermediate,

called a carbinolamine,is in equilibrium with two protonated forms. Protonation can
take place on either the nitrogen or the oxygen atom. Elimination of water from the

oxygen-protonated intermediate forms a protonated imine that loses a proton to yield

the imine.The equilibrium favors the nitrogen-protonated tetrahedral intermediate because nitro-
gen is more basic than oxygen. The equilibrium can be forced toward the imine by

removing water as it is formed or by precipitation of the imine product.
Overall,the addition of a nitrogen nucleophile to an aldehyde or a ketone is a
nucleophilic additionÐelimination reaction
:nucleophilic addition of an amine to form
an unstable tetrahedral intermediate,followed by elimination of water. The tetrahedral

intermediates are unstable because the newly formed carbon is bonded to an oxy-

gen and to a nitrogen
Ñanother electronegative atom. Water is eliminated,and loss of
a proton from the resulting protonated imine forms a stable imine.In contrast,the reaction of an aldehyde or a ketone with a carbon or hydrogen nu-
cleophile forms a stable tetrahedral compound because the newly formed carbon is

notbonded to a second electronegative atom. Thus,aldehydes and ketones undergo
nucleophilic addition reactions
with carbon and hydrogen nucleophiles,whereas they
undergo 
nucleophilic additionÐelimination reactions
with nitrogen nucleophiles.The pH at which imine formation is carried out must be carefully controlled. There
must be sufficient acid present to protonate the tetrahedral intermediate so that 

rather than the much more basic is the leaving group. However,if too much acid
HOH2Osp3sp3an imineOOCCH3CH2NH2H2Oan imineH2NCH2CCH3CH2CH3CH2NCH2H2Obenzaldehydean aldehyde3-pentanonea ketoneNCH2CH3CHCHCH3CH2CH3CH2ethylaminea primary aminebenzylaminea primary aminecatalyticHcatalyticHA compound with an carbon bonded
to an oxygen and to another
electronegative atom is unstable.
sp3an iminea protonated imineneutral tetrahedralintermediatea carbinolaminemechanism for imine formationORNH
2H2OONH2RHBHBNHRNHROHOH
NH2RHBHOHNRHBNRHBNÐprotonatedcarbinolamineOÐprotonatedcarbinolamineelimination
of waterBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 748
1.51.0
0.51pHkobsd (min1)234567Figure 18.2
Dependence of the rate of thereaction of acetone with
hydroxylamine on the pH of the
reaction mixture.Section 18.6Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Nitrogen Nucleophiles
749Aldehydes and ketones react with
primary amines to form imines.is present,it will protonate all of the reactant amine. Protonated amines are not nucleo-
philes,so they cannot react with carbonyl groups. Therefore,unlike the acid-catalyzed

reactions we have seen previously (Section 17.11),there is not sufficient acid present

to protonate the carbonyl group in the first step of the reaction (see Problem 17).
A plot of the observed rate constant for the reaction of acetone with hydroxylamine
as a function of the pH of the reaction mixture is shown in Figure18.2. This type of

plot is called a pH-rate profile
. The pH-rate profile in the figure is a bell-shaped curve
with the maximum rate occurring at about pH 4.5,1.5 pH units below the of

hydroxylamine As the acidity increases below pH4.5,the rate of the re-

action decreases because more and more of the amine becomes protonated. As a result,

less and less of the amine is present in the nucleophilic nonprotonated form. As the

acidity decreases above pH4.5,the rate decreases because less and less of the tetrahe-

dral intermediate is present in the reactive protonated form.
Imine formation is reversible:In acidic aqueous solutions,imines are hydrolyzed
back to the carbonyl compound and amine.
In an acidic solution,the amine is protonated and,therefore,is unable to react with the
carbonyl compound to reform the imine.
Imine formation and hydrolysis are important reactions in biological systems
(Sections19.21,24.9,and 25.6). Imine hydrolysis is the reason DNA contains A,G,C,

and T nucleotides,whereas RNA contains A,G,C,and U nucleotides (Section27.14).
PROBLEM 17The of protonated acetone is about and the of protonated hydroxylamine is 6.0.
a.In its reaction with hydroxylamine at (Figure18.2),what fraction of acetone
will be present in its acidic,protonated form? (
Hint:See Section1.20.)
b.In its reaction with hydroxylamine at what fraction of acetone will be pres-
ent in its acidic,protonated form?
c.In its reaction with acetone at (Figure18.2),what fraction of hydroxylamine
will be present in its reactive basic form?
PROBLEM 18A ketone can be prepared from the reaction of a nitrile with a Grignard reagent. Describe the

intermediate that is formed in this reaction,and explain how it can be converted to a ketone.
Addition of Secondary AminesAldehydes and ketones react with secondary amines to form enamines. Like imine for-
mation,the reaction requires a trace amount of an acid catalyst.
an enaminean enamineCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2NHOONH2OH2ONHNcyclopentanonecyclohexanonepyrrolidine
a secondary aminediethylaminea secondary aminecatalyticHcatalyticHpH1.5pH1.5,pH4.5pa7.5paHClCH3CH2NH3NCH2CH3H2OCHOCHpa6.0.paAn imine undergoes acid-catalyzedhydrolysis to form a carbonyl compound

and a primary amine.3-D Molecule:N,N-Diethyl-1-cyclo-pentenamineBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 749
750CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIThe mechanism for enamine formation is exactly the same as that for imine forma-
tion,until the last step of the reaction. When a primary amine reacts with an aldehyde

or a ketone,the protonated imine loses a proton from nitrogen in the last step of the re-

action,forming a neutral imine. However,when the amine is secondary,the positively

charged nitrogen is not bonded to a hydrogen. A stable neutral molecule is obtained by

removing a proton from the -carbon of the compound derived from the carbonyl

compound. An enamine is the result.
In aqueous acidic solutions,an enamine is hydrolyzed back to the carbonyl compound
and secondary amine,a reaction that is similar to the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an

imine back to the carbonyl compound and a primary amine.
PROBLEM 19a.Write the mechanism for the following reactions:
1.the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an imine to a carbonyl compound and a primary amine

2.the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an enamine to a carbonyl compound and a sec-
ondary amineb.How do these mechanisms differ?
PROBLEM 20Give the products of the following reactions. (A catalytic amount of acid is present in each
reaction.)a.c.
b.d.
Formation of Imine DerivativesCompounds such as hydroxylamine hydrazine and semicar-
bazide are similar to primary amines in that they all have an 

group. Thus,like primary amines,they react with aldehydes and ketones to form
NH2(NH2NHCONH2)(NH2NH2),(NH2OH),acetophenonecyclohexylaminecyclopentanonediethylamineacetophenonehexylaminecyclopentanoneethylamineHClOH2ONHHNaHHan enaminethis intermediate cannot lose a proton from N, so it loses  
a proton from an -carbonNÐprotonatedcarbinolamineOÐprotonatedcarbinolamineelimination
of waterneutral tetrahedralintermediatea carbinolaminemechanism for enamine formationONH
RH2OONRHBHBRHRRHRRRNNRRNOHBBOHNRHRRROHNHBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 750
Section 18.6Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Nitrogen Nucleophiles
7513-D Molecules:The N-methylimine ofacetone;The oxime of acetone;The hydrazone of acetone;
The semicarbazone of acetoneiminesÑoften called imine derivativesbecause the substituent attached to the imine
nitrogen is not an R group. The imine obtained from the reaction with hydroxylamine

is called an oxime,the imine obtained from the reaction with hydrazine is called 
a hydrazone
,and the imine obtained from the reaction with semicarbazide is called a
semicarbazone.Phenyl-substituted hydrazines react with aldehydes and ketones to form 
phenyl-hydrazones
.PROBLEM 21Imines can exist as stereoisomers. The isomers are named by the 
E,Zsystem of nomencla-
ture. (The lone pair has the lowest priority.)
Draw the structure of each of the following compounds:
a.(
E)-benzaldehyde semicarbazonec.cyclohexanone 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone
b.(
Z)-propiophenone oximePROBLEM 22Semicarbazide has two groups. Explain why only one of them forms an imine.
NH2RXRNCXNRRCCOCH3H2NNH2OH2NNHCNH2NNHCNH2OOH2Oa hydrazoneNNH2H2Oa semicarbazoneCCH3hydrazinesemicarbazidecatalyticHcatalyticHCHOH
2NOHan oximeCHNOHH
2OhydroxylaminecatalyticHTutorial:
Imine and oxime formationa phenylhydrazoneOH2NNHNNHH2Oa 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazoneOH2NNHNO
2CH3CH2CHO2NO2NCH3CH2CHNNHH
2ONO2phenylhydrazine2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazinecatalyticHcatalyticHBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 751
752CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IINONSPECTROPHOTOMETRICIDENTIFICATION OF ALDEHYDES

AND KETONESBefore spectrophotometric techniques were available,unknown
aldehydes and ketones were identified by preparing imine de-

rivatives. For example,suppose you have an unknown ketone

whose boiling point you have determined to be 140
¡C. This al-
lows you to narrow the possibilities to the five ketones (A to E)
listed in the following table,based on their boiling points
(ketones boiling at 139
¡C and 141¡C cannot be excluded,
unless your thermometer is calibrated perfectly and your labo-

ratory technique is sensational).2,4-DinitrophenylhydrazoneOximeSemicarbazone
Ketonebp (¡C)mp (¡C)mp (¡C)mp (¡C)
A140945798
B14010268123
C13912179121
D14010169112
E1419061101
Adding 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine to a sample of the unknown
ketone produces crystals of a 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone that

melt at 102
¡C. You can now narrow the choice to two ketones:
B and D. Preparing the oxime of the unknown ketone will not

distinguish between B and D because the oximes of B and D
have similar melting points,but preparing the semicarbazone
will allow you to identify the ketone. Finding that the semicar-

bazone of the unknown ketone has a melting point of 112
¡Cestablishes that the unknown ketone is D.
The Wolff
ÐKishner ReductionIn Section15.15,we saw that when a ketone or an aldehyde is heated in a basic solu-
tion of hydrazine,the carbonyl group is converted into a methylene group. This

process is called deoxygenationbecause an oxygen is removed from the reactant. The
reaction is known as the 
Wolff
ÐKishner reduction
.Hydroxide ion and heat differentiate the Wolff
ÐKishner reduction from ordinaryhydrazone formation. Initially,the ketone reacts with hydrazine to form a hydrazone.

After the hydrazone is formed,hydroxide ion removes a proton from the group.

Heat is required because this proton is not easily removed. The negative charge can be

delocalized onto carbon,which abstracts a proton from water. The last two steps are

repeated to form the deoxygenated product and nitrogen gas.NH2NH2NH2HO, CCH3CH2CH3OTutorial:
Wolff
ÐKishner reduction in synthesisHOa hydrazonemechanism for the WolffÐKishner reductionNH2NH2COCNN
HCH3CH3CNH
NCH3HHHOCNH
NCH3HOHON2CH2CH3CHCH3CHNH
NCH3H2Oproton removaldelocalization ofthe negative chargeproton removalBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 752
PROBLEM 23Hydration of an aldehyde can also be catalyzed by hydroxide ion. Propose a mechanism
for hydroxide-ion-catalyzed hydration.Section 18.7Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Oxygen Nucleophiles
75318.7Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketoneswith Oxygen NucleophilesAddition of Water
Water adds to an aldehyde or a ketone to form a 
hydrate
. A hydrate
is a moleculewith two OH groups on the same carbon. Hydrates are also called 
gem-diols(gem
comes from geminus,
Latin for 
ÒtwinÓ). Hydrates of aldehydes or ketones are gen-
erally too unstable to be isolated because the tetrahedral carbon is attached to two

oxygen atoms.Water is a poor nucleophile and therefore adds relatively slowly to a carbonyl
group. The rate of the reaction can be increased by an acid catalyst (Figure18.3).

Keep in mind that a catalyst has no effect on the position of the equilibrium. A cat-

alyst affects the 
rate
at which the equilibrium is achieved. In other words,the
catalyst affects the rate at which an aldehyde or a ketone is converted to a hydrate;

it has no effect on the 
amountof aldehyde or ketone converted to hydrate (Sec-
tion24.0).
H2OR (H)RCOR (H)RCOHOHan aldehyde ora ketonea gem-diola hydrateMost hydrates are too
unstable to be isolated.CH3HOCCH3HCOHFigure 18.3
The electrostatic potential mapsshow that the carbonyl carbon of
the protonated aldehyde is more
susceptible to nucleophilic attack
(the blue is more intense) than the
carbonyl carbon of the
unprotonated aldehyde.HCH3COH2Omechanism for acid-catalyzed hydrate formationHHCH3COHOHOHHHOHHOHOHHCH3H3OCOH42%58%HCH3CBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 753
754CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIThe extent to which an aldehyde or a ketone is hydrated in an aqueous solution de-
pends on the aldehyde or ketone. For example,only 0.2% of acetone is hydrated at

equilibrium,but 99.9% of formaldehyde is hydrated. Why is there such a difference?
The equilibrium constant for a reaction depends on the relative stabilities of the re-
actants and products. The equilibrium constant for hydrate formation,therefore,de-

pends on the relative stabilities of the carbonyl compound and the hydrate. We have

seen that electron-donating alkyl groups make a carbonyl compound 
more stable
(lessreactive) (Section18.2).
In contrast,alkyl groups make the hydrate 
less stablebecause of steric interactions
between the alkyl groups.
The electron clouds of the alkyl substituents do not interfere with each other in the
carbonyl compound because the bond angles are 120
¡. However,the bond angles in
the tetrahedral hydrate are 109.5¡,so the alkyl groups are closer to one another.
Alkyl groups,therefore,shift the equilibrium to the left
Ñtoward reactants
Ñbecause they stabilize the carbonyl compound and destabilize the hydrate. As a result,

less acetone than formaldehyde is hydrated at equilibrium.In conclusion,the percentage of hydrate present in solution at equilibrium depends
on both electronic and steric effects. Electron donation and bulky substituents

decrease
the percentage of hydrate present at equilibrium,whereas electron withdraw-
al and small substituents increase
it.CH3CH3COCH3CH3HOCOH120109.5CH3CH3CHHCHCH3COHOHOHOHOHOHleaststableCH3CH3COHOHOCCH3CCHCCCH3moststableCH3CH3OHCOHOacetone99.8%H2OCH
32      103CH3COHOHformaldehyde0.1%H2OH2.3   
   103HCOHOHacetaldehyde42%H2OH1.4
CH3COHOHKeq0.2%99.9%58%CCH3CHCC3-D Molecules:Acetone;
Acetone hydrateBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 754
Section 18.7Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Oxygen Nucleophiles
755PRESERVING BIOLOGICAL
SPECIMENSA 37% solution of formaldehyde in water is known
as formalinÑcommonly used in the past to preserve biological
specimens. Because formaldehyde is an eye and skin irritant,it
has been replaced in most biology laboratories by other preserva-
tives. One preservative frequently used is a solution of 2 to 5%

phenol in ethanol with added antimicrobial agents.If the amount of hydrate formed from the reaction of water with a ketone is too
small to detect,how do we know that the reaction has even occurred? We can prove

that it occurs by adding the ketone to water and isolating the ketone after

equilibrium has been established. Finding that the label has been incorporated into the

ketone indicates that hydration has occurred.
PROBLEM 24Trichloroacetaldehyde has such a large equilibrium constant for its reaction with water that
the reaction is essentially irreversible. Therefore,chloral hydrate,the product of the reac-

tion,is one of the few hydrates that can be isolated. Chloral hydrate is a sedative that can

be lethal. A cocktail laced with it is commonly known
Ñin detective novels,at least
Ñas aÒMickey Finn.
ÓExplain the favorable equilibrium constant.
PROBLEM 25Which of the following ketones has the largest equilibrium constant for the addition of water?
Addition of AlcoholThe product formed when one equivalent of an alcohol adds to an aldehyde is called a
hemiacetal. The product formed when a second equivalent of alcohol is added is
called an acetal. Like water,an alcohol is a poor nucleophile,so an acid catalyst is re-
quired for the reaction to take place at a reasonable rate.
OHH2OtrichloroacetaldehydeHCl3CCOHchloral hydrateHCl3COC18O-labeledH2OCH3CH3CH3CH3COHHOHOH
OOHCH3CH3H2OH2OCOHHHOHHOHHOHHOHCH3CH3COH181818181818
CCH3CH3CCH3CH3CCH3CH3COCH3OCOCH
3OO2NCNO
2OCOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 755
756CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIWhen the carbonyl compound is a ketone instead of an aldehyde,the addition products
are called a hemiketal
and a ketal
,respectively.
Hemiis the Greek word for 
Òhalf.ÓWhen one equivalent of alcohol has added to an
aldehyde or a ketone,the compound is halfway to the final acetal or ketal,which con-

tains groups from two equivalents of alcohol.
In the first step of acetal (or ketal) formation,the acid protonates the carbonyl oxygen,
making the carbonyl carbon more susceptible to nucleophilic attack (Figure18.3). Loss of

a proton from the protonated tetrahedral intermediate gives the hemiacetal (or hemiketal).

Because the reaction is carried out in an acidic solution,the hemiacetal (or hemiketal) is

in equilibrium with its protonated form. The two oxygen atoms of the hemiacetal (or

hemiketal) are equally basic,so either one can be protonated. Loss of water from the

tetrahedral intermediate with a protonated OH group forms a compound that is very

reactive because of its electron-deficient carbon. Nucleophilic attack on this compound

by a second molecule of alcohol,followed by loss of a proton,forms the acetal (or ketal).
Although the tetrahedral carbon of an acetal or ketal is bonded to two oxygen atoms,
causing us to predict that the acetal or ketal is not stable,the acetal or ketal can be iso-

lated if the water eliminated from the hemiacetal (or hemiketal) is removed from the

reaction mixture. This is because,if water is not available,the only compound the ac-

etal or ketal can form is an O-methylated carbonyl compound,which is less stable than

the acetal or ketal.
The acetal or ketal can be transformed back to the aldehyde or ketone in an acidic
aqueous solution.CH3CH3CH2OH3OH2OCH3CH3CH2COCH2CH32 CH3CH2OHOCH2CH3excessCCH3OH, HClHClH2OCH3CH3Oa ketonea hemiketala ketal
CH3OHCH
3CH3COHOCH3CH3CH3COCH3OCH3Can aldehydea hemiacetalan acetal
CH3OH, HClHClCH3OHH2OHCH3COHHCH3COCH3OCH3OCH3HCH3OCHBCCa hemiketalCH3OHCH3OHCH
3CH3COHBBOCH3OHCH3CH3COCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3H2Oa ketalCH3CH3COCH3CH3CH3CCH
3CH3COHOCH3CH3CH3COCH3mechanism for acid-catalyzed acetal or ketal formationCH3CH3CH3CH3HBHBOHHHHOTutorial:
Addition to carbonyl
compoundsBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 756
PROBLEM 26Show the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an acetal.
PROBLEM 27Explain mechanistically why an acetal or ketal can be isolated but most hydrates can
Õt beisolated.Notice that the mechanisms for imine,enamine,hydrate,and acetal (or ketal) for-
mation are similar. After the nucleophile (a primary amine in the case of imine forma-

tion,a secondary amine in the case of enamine formation,water in the case of hydrate

formation,and an alcohol in the case of acetal or ketal formation) has added to the car-

bonyl group,water is eliminated from the protonated tetrahedral intermediate,forming

a positively charged intermediate. In imine and hydrate formation,a neutral product is

achieved by losing a proton from a nitrogen and an oxygen,respectively. In enamine

formation,a neutral product is achieved by losing a proton from an In acetal

formation,a neutral compound is achieved by adding a second equivalent of alcohol.

Also notice that,because the nucleophile in hydrate formation is water,elimination of

water gives back the original aldehyde or ketone.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Explain why acetals and ketals are hydrolyzed back to the aldehyde or ketone in acidic
aqueous solutions,but are stable in basic aqueous solutions.
The easiest way to approach this kind of question is to write out the structures and the mecha-
nism that describe what the question is asking. When the mechanism is written,the answer

should become apparent. In an acidic solution,the acid protonates an oxygen of the acetal.

This creates a weak base that can be expelled by the other group. When the

group is expelled,water can attack the reactive intermediate,and you are then on your way

back to the ketone (or aldehyde).
In a basic solution,the group cannot be protonated. Therefore,the group that would
have to be eliminated to reform the ketone (or aldehyde) would be the very basic 

group. A group is too basic to be eliminated by the other group,which has

little driving force because of the positive charge that would be placed on its oxygen atom

if elimination were to occur.
Now continue on to Problem 28.
RRCOCH3OCH3CH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OOCH3OHRRCOCH3OHRRCOCH3H2O RRCOCH3RRCOCH3OCH3H2ORRCOCH3OHRRCOCH3H2OOHHHHOHHHHRROOHHCRRCCH3O(CH3OH)a-carbon.Section 18.7Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones with Oxygen Nucleophiles
757Tutorial:
Common terms, the addition
of nucleophiles to carbonyl
compoundsBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 757
758CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIPROBLEM 28a.Would you expect hemiacetals to be stable in basic solutions? Explain your answer.
b.Acetal formation must be catalyzed by an acid. Explain why it cannot be catalyzed by
c.Can the rate of hydrate formation be increased by hydroxide ion as well as by acid?
Explain.18.8Protecting Groups
Ketones (or aldehydes) react with 1,2-diols to form five-membered ring ketals (or ace-
tals) and with 1,3-diols to form six-membered ring ketals (or acetals). Recall that five-

and six-membered rings are formed relatively easily (Section11.11). The mechanism

is the same as that shown in Section18.7for acetal formation,except that instead of

reacting with two separate molecules of alcohol,the carbonyl compound reacts with

the two alcohol groups of a single molecule of the diol.
If a compound has two functional groups that will react with a given reagent and
you want only one of them to react,it is necessary to protect the other functional group

from the reagent. A group that protects a functional group from a synthetic operation

that it would not otherwise survive is called a 
protecting group
.If you have ever painted a room with a spray gun,you may have taped over the
things you do not want to paint,such as baseboards and window frames. In a simi-

lar way,1,2-diols and 1,3-diols are used to protect the carbonyl group of aldehydes

and ketones. The diol is like the tape. For example,in the synthesis of the following

hydroxyketone from the keto ester,can reduce both functional groups of a

keto ester,and the one that you don
Õt want to react
Ñthe keto group
Ñis the morereactive of the two.
If the keto group is converted to a ketal,only the ester group will react with
The protecting group can be removed by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis after the
ester has been reduced. It is critical that the conditions used to remove a protecting

group do not affect other groups in the molecule. Acetals and ketals are good protect-

ing groups because,being ethers,they do not react with bases,reducing agents,or ox-

idizing agents.LiAlH4.COCH3?OOOCH2OHLiAlH4HClOOH2OCH3CH2CCH2CH3HOCH2CH2OHH2OHOCH2CH2CH2OHOOCCH2CH3CH3CH2HClOO1,2-ethanediol1,3-propanediolCH3O.BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 758
Section 18.8Protecting Groups
759PROBLEM 29a.What would have been the product of the preceding reaction with if the keto
group had not been protected?b.What reagent could you use to reduce only the keto group?
PROBLEM 30Why donÕt acetals react with nucleophiles?In the following reaction,the aldehyde reacts with the diol because aldehydes are
more reactive than ketones. The Grignard reagent will now react only with the keto

group. The protecting group can be removed by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis.
One of the best ways to protect an OH group of an alcohol is to convert it to a
trimethylsilyl (TMS) ether by treating the alcohol with chlorotrimethylsilane and a ter-
tiary amine. The ether is formed by an reaction. Although a tertiary alkyl halide

does not undergo an reaction,the tertiary silyl compound does because 

bonds are longer than bonds,reducing steric hindrance at the site of nucleo-

philic attack. The amine prevents the solution from becoming acidic by reacting with

the HCl generated in the reaction. The TMS ether,which is stable in neutral and basic

solutions,can be removed with aqueous acid under mild conditions.
The OH group of a carboxylic acid group can be protected by converting the car-
boxylic acid into an ester.
CCSiCSN2SN2LiAlH4CH2OHCH2OCOCH3HCl LiAlH4HCl, H2OOOOHOCH2CH2OHHOCH2CH2OHCOCH3OOOOO
protectinggroupOHHHClHOCH2CH2CH2OH2. HCl
, H2O1. CH3MgBrOOOOHOH
HOCH2CH2CH2OHOHOOH(CH3CH2)3NCH
3MgBrH3OOOHCH3CH3CH3ClSiOSi(CH3)3OSi(CH3)3OHOOHCH3OCH
3protectinggroupchlorotrimethylsilanea trimethylsilyl ethera TMS etherMgBrBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 759
760CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIAn amino group can be protected by being converted into an amide (Section17.8).
The acetyl group can subsequently be removed by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis.
Protecting groups should be used only when absolutely necessary,because each
time a protecting group is used,it must be attached and then taken off. This adds two

steps to the synthesis,which decreases the overall yield of the target compound (the

desired product).PROBLEM 31What products would be formed from the preceding reaction if aniline
Õs amino group werenot protected?PROBLEM 32a.In a six-step synthesis,what will be the yield of the target compound if each of the
reactions employed gives an 80% yield? (An 80% yield is a relatively high labora-

tory yield.)b.What would be the yield if two more steps were added to the synthesis?
PROBLEM 33Show how each of the following compounds can be prepared from the given starting mate-
rial. In each case,you will need to use a protecting group.
a.b.OCHBrOCHCOOHHOCH
2CH2CH2CHCH3HOCH
2CH2CH2BrOHOCH3CHCH2COCH2CH3OHOCH3CHCH2COCH2CH3ClCH3CHCH2COHOHOHClCH3CH2OHexcessOCH3CHCH2COHCOOHOCH3CHCH2COCH2CH3CNCH3CH2OHHClH2OCNSOCl2anilineNH2OOacetanilideHNCCH3Op-nitroacetanilideHNCCH3NO2p-nitroanilineNH2CH3CONO2CH3CClHNO3H2SO41. HCl, H2O, 2. HOOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 760
Section 18.10The Wittig Reaction
76118.9Addition of Sulfur NucleophilesAldehydes and ketones react with thiols to form thioacetals and thioketals. The mech-
anism for addition of a thiol is the same as that for addition of an alcohol. Recall that

thiols are sulfur analogs of alcohols (Section12.10).
Thioacetal (or thioketal) formation is a synthetically useful reaction because a
thioacetal (or thioketal) is desulfurized when it reacts with and Raney nickel.

Desulfurization replaces the bonds with bonds.
Thioketal formation followed by desulfurization provides us with a third method
that can be used to convert the carbonyl group of a ketone into a methylene group. We

have already seen the other two methods
Ñthe Clemmensen reduction and theWolff
ÐKishner reduction (Sections15.15and 18.6).
18.10The Wittig ReactionAn aldehyde or a ketone reacts with a phosphonium ylide (pronounced 
ÒILL-idÓ) toform an alkene. An 
ylideis a compound that has opposite charges on adjacent cova-
lently bonded atoms with complete octets. The ylide can also be written in the double-

bonded form because phosphorus can have more than eight valence electrons.
The reaction of an aldehyde or a ketone with a phosphonium ylide to form an
alkene is called a 
Wittig reaction
. The overall reaction amounts to interchanging the
double-bonded oxygen of the carbonyl compound and the double-bonded carbon

group of the phosphonium ylide.a phosphonium ylide(C6H5)3PCH
2(C6H5)3PCH
2H2Raney NiH2Raney NiHHSSCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3SSCCH2CH3CH3CH2CHCSH2HClSSHSCH2CH2CH2SHa thioketalH2OOHCl2 CH3SHCH3CH2CH2CH3a thioketalH2OCH3CH2CCH2CH3SCH3SCH31,3-propanedithiolmethanethiolCOGeorg Friedrich Karl Wittig
(1897Ð1987)was born in Germany.
He received a Ph.D. from the

University of Marburg in 1926. 

He was a professor of chemistry at

the Universities of Braunschweig,

Freiberg,T
bingen,and Heidelberg,
where he studied phosphorus-

containing organic compounds. 

He received the Nobel Prize in

chemistry in 1979,sharing it with

H.C. Brown (Section4.9).
BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 761
762CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IITutorial:
Wittig reactionÐsynthesisEvidence has accumulated that the Wittig reaction is a concerted cycload-
dition reaction,with the nucleophilic carbon of the ylide attacking the electrophilic

carbon of the carbonyl compound. It is called a cycloaddition reaction be-

cause,of the four electrons involved in the cyclic transition state,two come from the

carbonyl group and two come from the ylide (Section29.4). Elimination of tri-

phenylphosphine oxide forms the alkene product.
The phosphonium ylide needed for a particular synthesis is obtained by an re-
action between triphenylphosphine and an alkyl halide with the appropriate number of

carbon atoms. A proton on the carbon adjacent to the positively charged phosphorus

atom is sufficiently acidic to be removed by a strong base such as butyl-

lithium (Section12.11).
If two sets of reagents are available for the synthesis of an alkene,it is better to use
the one that requires the less sterically hindered alkyl halide for synthesis of the ylide.

Recall that the more sterically hindered the alkyl halide,the less reactive it is in an 

reaction (Section10.2). For example,it is better to use a three-carbon alkyl halide and

a five-carbon carbonyl compound than a five-carbon alkyl halide and a three-carbon

carbonyl compound for the synthesis of 3-ethyl-3-hexene because it would be easier to

form an ylide from 1-bromopropane than from 3-bromopentane.(C5H6)3PCHCH2CH3(C5H6)3PCCH2CH3OCH2CH33-ethyl-3-hexeneHCCH3CH2CCHCH
2CH3CH2CH3OCH2CH3CCH3CH2CH3CH2preferred methodSN2pa35SN2RRP(C6H5)3   P(C6H5)3   CH2COCRRRCH2P(C6H5)3   OOCRCH2a [2 2]cycloaddition
reactionp[22][22]CCH3CH3CHCH3(C6H5)3PC(C6H5)3PO(C6H5)3PCHCH3a phosphonium ylideO(C6H5)3PtriphenylphosphineoxideOCH3CH3OH3CH3CCH3CH3CCtriphenylphosphineBrCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2 Li(C6H5)3P(C
6H5)3PCHCH3(C6H5)3PBra phosphonium ylideSN2BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 762
Section 18.10The Wittig Reaction
763The Wittig reaction is a very powerful way to make an alkene because the reaction
is completely regioselective
Ñthe double bond will be in only one place.The Wittig reaction also is the best way to make a terminal alkene such as methylene-
cyclohexane because other methods would form a terminal alkene only as a minor

product if at all.The stereoselectivity of the Wittig reaction depends on the structure of the ylide.
Ylides can be divided into two types:
Stabilized ylideshave a group,such as a car-
bonyl group,that can share the carbanion
Õs negative charge; 
unstabilized ylidesdo nothave such a group.
Stabilized ylides form primarily 
Eisomers,and unstabilized ylides form primarily
Zisomers.(C6H5)3PCH(C6H5)3PCHCH2CH3Z alkeneCHCCH3OROCHROCHHRCH
2CH3CCHCRHCOCH3E alkeneO(C6H5)3PCHCH
2CH3CCH3(C6H5)3PCH
CCH3(C6H5)3PCH
an unstabilized ylidea stabilized ylideOCH3BrCH2CH3minorHOCH3OHCH3H2SO4CH2CH2OHCH2BrminorHO100%(C6H5)3PCH2OCH2(C6H5)3POmethylenecyclohexaneBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 763
PROBLEM 34SOLVED
a.What carbonyl compound and what phosphonium ylide are required for the synthesis of
the following alkenes?
1.3.
2.4.
b.What alkyl halide is required to prepare each of the phosphonium ylides?
SOLUTION TO 34a(1)
The atoms on either side of the double bond can come fromthe carbonyl compound,so there are two pairs of compounds that can be used.
SOLUTION TO 34b(1)
The alkyl halide required depends on which phosphonium
ylide is used; it would be either 1-bromobutane or 2-bromopropane.
The primary alkyl halide would be more reactive in the reaction required to make the
ylide,so the best method would be to use acetone and the ylide obtained from 1-bromobutane.
SN2CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CHCH3BrorCHCH
2CHCH2CH3(C6H5)2CCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCCH
3CH3CH3CCH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CHCCH
3CH3or(C6H5)3P(C
6H5)3POO764CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIis used in the food industry to color margarine.
Many people take -carotene as a dietary supplement because

there is some evidence that high levels of -carotene are associat-

ed with a low incidence of cancer. More recent evidence,howev-

er,suggests that -carotene taken in pill form does not have the

cancer-preventing effects of -carotene obtained from vegetables.
bbbbb-CaroteneOHP(C6H5)3Hvitamin A aldehyde  -carotene-CAROTENEis found in yellow-orange fruits and
vegetables such as apricots,mangoes,carrots,and
sweet potatoes. The synthesis of -carotene from vitamin A is

an important example of the use of the Wittig reaction in indus-

try. Notice that the ylide is a stabilized ylide and the product has

the Econfiguration at the reaction site.
bb-CaroteneBBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:32 PM  Page 764
CH3COCH2CH3the Si facethe Re face123Section 18.11Stereochemistry of Nucleophilic Addition Reactions: 
Reand SiFaces7653-D Molecules:2-Butanone;
(S)-2-Butanol;(R)-2-Butanol18.11Stereochemistry of Nucleophilic
Addition Reactions: Reand SiFacesA carbonyl carbon bonded to two different substituents is a 
prochiral carbonyl carbon
because it will become a chirality center (asymmetric carbon) if it adds a group unlike ei-

ther of the groups already bonded to it. The addition product will be a pair of enantiomers.
The carbonyl carbon and the three atoms attached to it define a plane. The nucleo-
phile can approach either side of the plane. One side of the carbonyl compound is

called the Re(pronounced ÒreeÓ) face,and the other side is called the 
Si(pronouncedÒsighÓ) face; 
Reis for 
rectus
and Siis for 
sinisterÑsimilar to Rand S. To distinguish
between the ReandSifaces,the three groups attached to the carbonyl carbon are as-
signed priorities using the CahnÐIngoldÐPrelog system of priorities used in 
E,ZandR,Snomenclature (Sections3.5and 5.6respectively). The 
Reface is the face closest
to the observer when decreasing priorities are in a clockwise direction,

and the Siface is the opposite face
Ñthe one closest to the observer when decreasing
priorities are in a counterclockwise direction.Attack by a nucleophile on the 
Reface forms one enantiomer,whereas attack on the
Siface forms the other enantiomer. For example,attack by hydride ion on the 
Reface
of butanone forms (
S)-2-butanol,and attack on the 
Siface forms (
R)-2-butanol.
Whether attack on the Reface forms the 
Ror Senantiomer depends on the priority
of the attacking nucleophile relative to the priorities of the groups attached to the car-

bonyl carbon. For example,we just saw that attack by hydride ion on the 
Reface of bu-
tanone forms (S)-2-butanol,but attack by a methyl Grignard reagent on the 
Reface of
propanal forms (R)-2-butanol.
OCHCH3MgBr attack on the Re facefollowed by Hthe Si face is closestto the observerCH3CH2CCH3CH2CCH3CH2OHHCH3CH3OHH(S)-2-butanol(R)-2-butanol132CH3MgBr attack on the Si facefollowed by HOCH attack on the Re facefollowed by HH attack on the Si facefollowed by Hthe Re face is closestto the observerCH3CH2CH3CCH3OHCH2CH3HCOHCH2CH3CH3H(S)-2-butanol(R)-2-butanol123123a pair of enantiomersOCHZXYa prochiralcarbonyl carbonYZXOHCYZXOHCBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 765
PROBLEM 35Which enantiomer is formed when a methyl Grignard reagent attacks the Reface of each
of the following carbonyl compounds?
a.propiophenonec.2-pentanone
b.benzaldehyded.3-hexanone
18.12Designing a Synthesis V: Disconnections,
Synthons, and Synthetic EquivalentsThe synthesis of a complicated molecule from simple starting materials is not always
obvious. We have seen that it is often easier to work backward from the desired product

to available starting materials
Ña process called retrosynthetic analysis
(Section6.11).
In a retrosynthetic analysis,the chemist dissects a molecule into smaller and smaller

pieces until readily available starting materials are obtained.
A useful step in a retrosynthetic analysis is a 
disconnectionÑbreaking a bond toproduce two fragments. Typically,one fragment is positively charged and one is nega-

tively charged. The fragments of a disconnection are called 
synthons. Synthons are
often not real compounds
Ñthey can be imaginary species. For example,if we consid-
er the retrosynthetic analysis of cyclohexanol,we see that a disconnection gives two

synthonsÑan -hydroxycarbocation and a hydride ion.
A synthetic equivalent
is the reagent that is actually used as the source of the synthon.Cyclohexanone is the synthetic equivalent for the -hydroxycarbocation,and sodium

borohydride is the synthetic equivalent for hydride ion. Thus,cyclohexanol,the target

molecule,can be prepared by treating cyclohexanone with sodium borohydride.
aretrosynthetic analysisa disconnectionOHHOH
Hopen arrow represents aretrosynthetic operationsynthonsaretrosynthetic analysis
target molecul
eYXWstarting materials766CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIENZYME-CATALYZED
CARBONYL ADDITIONSIn an enzyme-catalyzed addition to a carbonyl
compound,only one of the enantiomers is formed. The enzyme

can block one face of the carbonyl compound so that it cannot

be attacked,or it can position the nucleophile so that it is able to

attack the carbonyl group from only one side of the molecule.
COnucleophileBecause the carbonyl carbon and the three atoms attached to it define a plane,the
Reand Sifaces have an equal probability of being attacked. Consequently,an addition
reaction forms equal amounts of the two enantiomers.
BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 766
Section 18.12Designing a Synthesis V: Disconnections, Synthons, and Synthetic Equivalents
767When carrying out a disconnection,you must decide,after breaking the bond,
which fragment gets the positive charge and which gets the negative charge. In the ret-

rosynthetic analysis of cyclohexanol,we could have given the positive charge to the

hydrogen,and many acids (HCl,HBr,etc.) could have been used for the synthetic

equivalent for However,we would have been at a loss to find a synthetic equiva-

lent for an -hydroxycarbanion. Therefore,when we carry out the disconnection,we

assign the positive charge to the carbon and the negative charge to the hydrogen.
Cyclohexanol can also be disconnected by breaking the bond instead of the
bond,forming a carbocation and hydroxide ion.
The problem now becomes choosing a synthetic equivalent for the carbocation. A syn-
thetic equivalent for a positively charged synthon needs an electron-withdrawing

group at just the right place. Cyclohexyl bromide,with an electron-withdrawing

bromine,is a synthetic equivalent for the cyclohexyl carbocation. Cyclohexanol,

therefore,can be prepared by treating cyclohexyl bromide with hydroxide ion. This

method,however,is not as good as the first synthesis we proposed
Ñreduction ofcyclohexanone
Ñbecause some of the alkyl halide is converted into an alkene,so the
overall yield of the target compound is lower.
Retrosynthetic analysis shows that 1-methylcyclohexanol can be formed from the re-
action of cyclohexanone,the synthetic equivalent for the -hydroxycarbocation,and

methylmagnesium bromide,the synthetic equivalent for the methyl anion (Section18.4).
Other disconnections of 1-methylcyclohexanol are possible because any bond to
carbon can serve as a disconnection site. For example,one of the ring bonds

could be broken. However,these are not useful disconnections,because the synthetic
CCsynthesisO1.  CH3MgBr2.  H3OHOCH
3retrosynthetic analysisOHHOCH
3CH3asynthesisOHBrHOretrosynthetic analysisOHHOCHCOaH.synthesisOH1.  NaBH42.  H+, H2OOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 767
equivalents of the synthons they produce are not easily prepared. A retrosynthetic step
must lead to readily obtainable starting materials.PROBLEM 36Using bromocyclohexane as a starting material,how could you synthesize the following
compounds?a.c.e.
b.d.f.
ClCH2CH3CH2CH2OHCH2OHCCH3CH3COOHOHretrosynthetic analysisHOCH
3HOCH
3HOCH
3768CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IISEMISYNTHETIC DRUGSTaxolis a difficult molecule to synthesize be-
cause of its complicated structure. Chemists have
made the synthesis a lot easier by allowing the yew tree to carry

out the first part of the synthesis. Chemists extract the drug pre-

cursor from the needles of the tree,and the precursor is con-
¨verted to Taxolin the laboratory. Thus,the precursor is isolat-
ed from a renewable resource,while the drug itself could be ob-

tained only by killing the tree. In this manner,chemists have

learned to synthesize compounds jointly with nature.¨SYNTHESIZING ORGANICCOMPOUNDSOrganic chemists synthesize compounds for
many reasons:to study their properties or to answer a variety 

of chemical questions,or because they have unusual shapes or

other unusual structural features or useful properties. One rea-

son chemists synthesize natural products is to provide us with

greater supplies of these compounds than nature can produce.
For example,Taxol
Ña compound that has been successful intreating ovarian and breast cancer
Ñis extracted from the bark
of Taxus
,the yew tree found in the Pacific Northwest. The sup-
ply of natural Taxolis limited because yew trees are uncom-

mon and grow very slowly and stripping the bark kills the tree.

The bark of one tree provides only one dose of the drug. In ad-

dition,Taxus
forests serve as habitats for the spotted owl,an
endangered species,so harvesting the trees would accelerate

the owl
Õs demise. Once chemists were successful in determin-
ing the structure of Taxol,efforts could be undertaken to syn-

thesize it in order to make it more widely available as an

anticancer drug. Several syntheses have been successful.
¨¨¨Once a compound has been synthesized,chemists can study
its properties to learn how it works; then they can design and

synthesize safer or more potent analogs. For example,chemists

have found that the anticancer activity of Taxolis substantial-

ly reduced if its four ester groups are hydrolyzed. This gives

one small clue as to how the molecule functions.
¨C6H5CNHC6H5C6H5COHHOOOOCH3COOOOHOOCOCH3OOHTaxolBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 768
Section 18.13Nucleophilic Addition to -Unsaturated Aldehydes and Ketones
769a,b18.13Nucleophilic Addition to -Unsaturated
Aldehydes and KetonesThe resonance contributors for an carbonyl compound show that the
molecule has two electrophilic sites:the carbonyl carbon and the 
This means that if an aldehyde or a ketone has a double bond in the -position,a
nucleophile can add either to the carbonyl carbon or to the -carbon.
Nucleophilic addition to the carbonyl carbon is called 
direct addition
or 1,2-
addition.Nucleophilic addition to the is called 
conjugate additionor 1,4-addition,
because addition occurs at the 1-and 4-positions (i.e.,across the conjugated system).

After 1,4-addition has occurred,the product
Ñan enolÑtautomerizes to a ketone (or to
an aldehyde,Section6.6),so the overall reaction amounts to addition to the car-

bonÐcarbon double bond,with the nucleophile adding to the and a proton
from the reaction mixture adding to the Compare these reactions with the

1,2-and 1,4-addition reactions you studied in Section8.7.
Whether the product obtained from nucleophilic addition to an -unsaturated
aldehyde or ketone is the direct addition product or the conjugate addition product de-

pends on the nature of the nucleophile,the structure of the carbonyl compound,and

the conditions under which the reaction is carried out.Nucleophiles that form 
unstable addition products
Ñthat is,nucleophiles that are
weak bases,allowing direct addition to be reversible
Ñform conjugate addition prod-ucts because conjugate addition is notreversible,and the conjugate addition product is
more stable. Nucleophiles in this group include halide ions,cyanide ion,thiols,alco-

hols,and amines.
a,bORCHYCHCR
OYRCHCHCR
OYRCHCHCR
OYketo tautomerenol tautomer
RCHCH
2CROHYRCHCHCR
H3Oconjugate addition resonance contributorsa-carbon.b-carbonb-carbonORCHYCHCR
direct additionORCHCHCR
YOHRCHCHCR
YH3Oba,bORCHCH
an ,   -unsaturatedcarbonyl compoundCRORCHCHCR
ORCHCHCR
electrophilic siteelectrophilic site
b-carbon.a,b-unsaturatedA,BBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 769
770CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IINucleophiles that form 
stable addition products
Ñthat is,nucleophiles that are
strong bases,thereby making direct addition irreversible
Ñcan form eitherdirect addi-tion products or conjugate addition products. Nucleophiles in this group include hy-

dride ion and carbanions. The reaction that prevails is the one that is faster,so the

product that is formed will depend on the reactivity of the carbonyl group. Compounds

with reactive carbonyl groups form primarily direct addition products because for

those compounds,direct addition is faster,whereas compounds with less reactive car-

bonyl groups form primarily conjugate addition products because for 
thosecom-pounds,conjugate addition is faster. For example,aldehydes have more reactive

carbonyl groups than do ketones,so sodium borohydride forms primarily direct addi-

tion products with aldehydes. Compared with aldehydes,ketones form less of the di-

rect addition product and more of the conjugate addition product.Notice that a saturated alcohol is the final product of conjugate addition in the preced-
ing reaction because the carbonyl group of the ketone will react with a second equiva-

lent of hydride ion.If direct addition is the desired outcome of hydride addition,it can be achieved by car-
rying out the reaction in the presence of cerium chloride,a Lewis acid that activates the

carbonyl group toward nucleophilic attack by complexing with the carbonyl oxygen.
OHOHOOHOOHproduct of direct addition97%1. NaBH42. EtOH1. NaBH42. EtOH1. NaBH42. EtOHproduct of direct addition51%product of conjugate addition49%OCH3COCH3CCH2CH3CHCH3CH3NCH3SCH3OOCH3NHCH3CHCH3SHCHOCH3CCHOCH3CBrCH2CH2CNOOHBrCH2CNHClTutorial:
1,2-vs 1,4-Additions to
,-unsaturated carbonyl
compoundsbaBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 770
Section 18.13Nucleophilic Addition to -Unsaturated Aldehydes and Ketones
771a,bLike hydride ions,Grignard reagents add irreversibly to carbonyl groups. There-
fore,Grignard reagents react with -unsaturated aldehydes and unhindered -

unsaturated ketones to form direct addition products.
If,however,the rate of direct addition is slowed down by steric hindrance,a Grignard
reagent will form a conjugate addition product because conjugate addition then

becomes the faster reaction.
Only conjugate addition occurs when Gilman reagents (lithium dialkylcuprates,
Section12.12) react with -unsaturated aldehydes and ketones. Therefore,Gri-

gnard reagents should be used when you want to add an alkyl group to the carbonyl

carbon,whereas Gilman reagents should be used when you want to add an alkyl

group to the Electrophiles and nucleophiles can be classified as either 
hard
or soft. Hard elec-trophiles and nucleophiles are more polarized than soft ones. Hard nucleophiles prefer

to react with hard electrophiles,and soft nucleophiles prefer to react with soft elec-

trophiles. Therefore,a Grignard reagent with a highly polarized bond prefers

to react with the harder bond,whereas a Gilman reagent with a much less po-

larized bond prefers to react with the softer bond.
PROBLEM 37Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 38Which would give a higher yield of an unsaturated alcohol when treated with sodium boro-
hydride,a sterically hindered ketone or a nonsterically hindered ketone?
1. (CH3)2CuLi2. H3OOCH3CHCCH3CH3C1. NaBH42. H3OO1. CH3MgBr2. H3OOCH3CHCCH3CH3CCNHClOCCCCuCOCMg1. CH3MgBr2. H3OHOCH
3CH3O1. (CH3)2CuLi2. H3OOOb-carbon.a,bOC1. C6H5Li2. H3OCH2OCH2CH2CHCOHCOHCHCH2CHCH31. CH3MgBr2. H3OCH2CHa,ba,bOOH99%1. NaBH4, CeCl32. EtOHBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 771
772CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IICANCER CHEMOTHERAPYTwo compounds
Ñvernolepin and helinalin
Ñowe
their effectiveness as anticancer drugs to conju-
gate addition reactions.Cancer cells are cells that have lost their ability to control
their growth; therefore,they proliferate rapidly. DNA poly-

merase is an enzyme that a cell needs to make a copy of its

DNA for a new cell. DNA polymerse has an SH group and

each of these drugs has two -unsaturated carbonyl groups.

Irreversible conjugate addition of the enzyme to an -unsat-

urated carbonyl group inactivates the enzyme.
a,ba,bhelenalinvernolepinH2CCH2HHOHHCOOOOOHCH2OCH2HOHCH3OHCH3HenzymeOOCH2OOCH2SenzymeHSconjugate additionactiveinactive18.14Nucleophilic Addition to -Unsaturated
Carboxylic Acid Derivativescarboxylic acid derivatives,like aldehydes and ke-
tones,have two electrophilic sites for nucleophilic attack:They can undergo 
conjugateadditionor nucleophilic acyl substitution. Notice that they undergo 
nucleophilic acylsubstitutionrather than direct addition
because the carbonyl com-
pound had a group that can be replaced by a nucleophile. In other words,as with non-

conjugated carbonyl compounds,nucleophilic acyl addition becomes nucleophilic

acyl substitution if the carbonyl group is attached to a group that can be replaced by

another group (Section18.3).
Nucleophiles react with carboxylic acid derivatives with reactive
carbonyl groups,such as acyl chlorides,to form nucleophilic acyl substitution prod-

ucts. Conjugate addition products are formed from the reaction of nucleophiles with

less reactive carbonyl groups,such as ester and amides.
OCClOCNHCH3OCOCH3OCNHCH3OCH3product ofconjugate
additionproduct of
nucleophilic
acyl substitution       CH3OH       CH3OHa,b-unsaturateda,b-unsaturateda,b-unsaturateda,b-UnsaturatedA,BOCOCH3OCOCH3Br       HBrBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 772
Section 18.15Enzyme-Catalyzed Additions to -Unsaturated Carbonyl Compounds
773a,bPROBLEM 39Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
18.15Enzyme-Catalyzed Additions to-Unsaturated Carbonyl CompoundsSeveral reactions in biological systems involve addition to carbonyl
compounds. The following are examples of conjugate addition reactions that occur in

biological systems. Notice that the carbonyl groups are either unreactive or

have low reactivity (the CoA ester) toward the nucleophile,so conjugate addition

occurs in each case. The last reaction is an important step in the biosynthesis of fatty

acids (Section19.21).
-methylaspartaseOOOCCHCHCO
NH3CH3NH3crotonaseOHOCH3(CH2)nCHCH2CSCoAOCHCSCoACH3(CH2)nCHH2OOOCCHCOOCCH3OOfumaraseCCHCOOOOCCHCH2COOHOHOPO
32H2OenolaseOCH2CHCOH2OOCHOCCHCOOPO32H(COO )a,b-unsaturatedA,BOCOCH2CH3CH2CHOCOCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2NHCH2CH2       CH3CH2CH2NH2OCCHOCH
31. LiAlH42. H3Oa.OCCl1. LiAlH42. H3Ob.OCCHOCH
3NH3c.OCClexcessNH3d.CH3CHCH3CHCH3CHCH3CHCHCH
BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 773
774CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIENZYME-CATALYZED CIS
ÐTRANSINTERCONVERSIONEnzymes that catalyze the interconversion of cis
and trans isomers are called cis
Ðtrans isomerases. These
isomerases are all known to contain thiol (SH) groups. Thiols

are weak bases and therefore add to the of an
b-carboncarbonyl compound (conjugate addition). The
resulting carbonÐcarbon single bond rotates before the enol is ableto tautomerize to the ketone. When tautomerization occurs,the

thiol is eliminated. Rotation results in cis
Ðtrans interconversion.
a,b-unsaturatedcis double bondtrans double bondOOCOOOOCenzymeÐSHOHOCOOOOCenzymeÐSrotationOOCOOOOCenzymeÐSHOHOCOOOOCenzymeÐSSummaryAldehydes
and ketones
are Class II carbonyl compounds;
they have an acyl group attached to a group or
that cannot be readily replaced by another group.
Aldehydes and ketones undergo 
nucleophilic additionreactions
with C and H nucleophiles and nucleophilicadditionÐelimination reactions
with O and N nucleophiles.With the exception of amides,carboxylic acid derivatives

(Class I carbonyl compounds) undergo 
nucleophilic acylsubstitutionreactionswith C and H nucleophiles to form a
Class II carbonyl compound,which then undergoes a

nucleophilic additionreactionwith a second equivalent of
the C or H nucleophile. Notice that the tetrahedral interme-

diate formed by attack of a nucleophile on a carbonyl

compound is stable if the newly formed tetrahedral carbon is

not bonded to a second electronegative atom or group and 

is generally unstable if it is.Electronic and steric factors cause an aldehyde to be
more reactive than a ketone toward nucleophilic attack.

Aldehydes and ketones are less reactive than acyl halides

and acid anhydrides and are more reactive than esters,car-

boxylic acids,and amides.
Grignard reagents react with aldehydes to form sec-
ondary alcohols,with ketones and acyl halides to form ter-

tiary alcohols,and with carbon dioxide to form carboxylic

acids. Aldehydes are reduced to primary alcohols,ketones

to secondary alcohols,and amides to amines.
Aldehydes and ketones undergo acid-catalyzed addition
of water to form hydrates. Electron donation and bulky

substituents decrease the percentage of hydrate present at

equilibrium. Most hydrates are too unstable to be isolated.

Acid-catalyzed addition of alcohol to aldehydes forms

hemiacetalsand acetals,and to ketones forms 
hemiketals
Ar)(H, R,and ketals
. Acetal and ketal formation are reversible.
Cyclic acetals and ketals serve as 
protecting groups
foraldehyde and ketone functional groups. Aldehydes and ke-

tones react with thiols to form thioacetals and thioketals;

desulfurization replaces the bonds with 

bonds.Aldehydes and ketones react with primary amines to
form iminesand with secondary amines to form 
enamines.The mechanisms are the same,except for the site from

which a proton is lost in the last step of the reaction. Imine
and enamine formation are reversible; imines and enam-

ines are hydrolyzed under acidic conditions back to the

carbonyl compound and amine. A 
pH-rate profile
is aplot of the observed rate constant as a function of the pH

of the reaction mixture. Hydroxide ion and heat differ-

entiate the WolffÐKishner reduction
from ordinary
hydrazone
formation.An aldehyde or a ketone reacts with a phosphonium
ylide in a Wittig reaction
to form an alkene. A Wittig reac-
tion is a concerted cycloaddition reaction; it is

completely regioselective. Stabilized ylides form primarily

Eisomers; unstabilized ylides form primarily Zisomers.A prochiral carbonyl carbon
is a carbonyl carbon that
is bonded to two different substituents. The 
Reface is the
one closest to the observer when decreasing priorities are in

a clockwise direction; the Siface is the opposite face. At-
tack by a nucleophile on either the 
Reface or the 
Siface
forms a pair of enantiomers.A useful step in a retrosynthetic analysis is a 
disconnect-ionÑbreaking a bond to produce two fragments. 
Synthonsare fragments of a disconnection. A 
synthetic equivalent
isthe reagent used as the source of the synthon.[22]CHCSBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 774
Summary of Reactions775Nucleophilic addition to the carbonyl carbon of an -
unsaturated Class II carbonyl compound is called 
direct
addition; addition to the is called 
conjugate ad-dition. Whether direct or conjugate addition occurs de-
pends on the nature of the nucleophile,the structure of the

carbonyl compound,and the reaction conditions. Nucleo-

philes that form unstable direct addition products
Ñhalideions,cyanide ion,thiols,alcohols,and amines
Ñform con-jugate addition products. Nucleophiles that form stable ad-

dition productsÑhydride ion and carbanionsÑform direct
b-carbona,baddition products with reactive carbonyl groups and conju-
gate addition products with less reactive carbonyl groups.

A Grignard reagent with a highly polarized bond

reacts with the harder bond; a Gilman reagent 

with a less polarized bond reacts with the softer
bond.Nucleophiles form nucleophilic acyl substitution prod-
ucts with Class I carbonyl compounds that

have reactive carbonyl groups and conjugate addition prod-

ucts with compounds with less reactive carbonyl groups.
a,b-unsaturatedCCCCuCOCMgSummary of Reactions1.Reaction of 
carbonyl compoundswith carbon nucleophiles (Section18.4).
a.Reaction of formaldehydewith a Grignard reagent forms a primary alcohol:b.Reaction of an aldehyde(other than formaldehyde) with a Grignard reagent forms a secondary alcohol:c.Reaction of a ketone
with a Grignard reagent forms a tertiary alcohol:d.Reaction of an esterwith a Grignard reagent forms a tertiary alcohol with two identical substituents:
e.Reaction of an acyl chloride
with a Grignard reagent forms a tertiary alcohol with two identical substituents:
f.Reaction of with a Grignard reagent forms a carboxylic acid:
CH3OHCCOO1. CH3MgBr2. H3OOCO2RCH
3CRCl
1. 2 CH3MgBr2. H3OOHCH3OCRCH
3CROR
1. 2 CH3MgBr2. H3OOHCH3OCRRCRR1. CH3MgBr2. H3OOHCH3OCRHC1. CH3MgBr2. H3OOHCH3OHCROHCH1. CH3MgBr2. H3OCH3CH2OHBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 775
776CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds IIg.Reaction with acetylide ions:h.Reaction with cyanide ion:
2.Reactions of 
carbonyl compoundswith hydride ion donors (Section18.5).
a.Reaction of an aldehydewith sodium borohydride forms a primary alcohol:b.Reaction of a ketone
with sodium borohydride forms a secondary alcohol:c.Reaction of an esterwith lithium aluminum hydride forms two alcohols:
d.Reaction of an esterwith diisobutylaluminum hydride forms an aldehyde:
e.Reaction of a carboxylic acidwith lithium aluminum hydride forms a primary alcohol:f.Reaction of an acyl chloride
with lithium aluminum hydride forms a primary alcohol:CH2ROH
1. LiAlH42. H3OOCRCl
CH2ROH
1. LiAlH42. H3OOCROH
CROCROR
1. [(CH3)2CHCH2]2AlH, 78 C2. H2OOHRCH2OHR
OHOCROR1. LiAlH42. H3OOCCHRRR1. NaBH42. H3OOHRRCH2OHR1. NaBH42. H3OOHCRNCCRCNHClOHRORCRCR
CC1. RCC
2. H3OOHRRORCBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 776
Summary of Reactions777g.Reaction of an amidewith lithium aluminum hydride forms an amine:3.Reactions of 
aldehydesand ketones
with amines (Section18.6).
a.Reaction with a primary amineforms an imine:When the product is a Schiff base; Z can also be OH,or 
b.Reaction with a secondary amineforms an enamine:c.The Wolff
ÐKishner reduction converts a carbonyl group to a methylene group:
4.Reactions of an 
aldehydeor a ketone
with oxygen nucleophiles.a.Reaction of an aldehydeor a ketone
with water forms a hydrate (Section18.7):
b.Reaction of an aldehydeor a ketone
with excess alcohol forms an acetal or a ketal (Section18.8):
OHORCRRH2OORORCRR2 ROHHClOCRROHOHCRRH2OHClOCRRCH2RROCRRNH2NH2HO,H2ORNHRCHCORCNRRRCcatalyticHNHCONH2.NHC6H3(NO2)2,NHC6H5,NH2,ZR,catalyticHNZCH2NZH2ORRCRROCH2RNR
RNRRR1. LiAlH42. H2OCH2RNHR
NHRR1. LiAlH42. H2OCH2RNH
2NH21. LiAlH42. H2OOCOCROCBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 777
778CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II5.Protecting groups (Section18.8).
a.Aldehydesand ketones
can be protected by being converted to acetals:
b.The OH group of an alcoholcan be protected by being converted to a TMS ether:
c.The OH group of a carboxylic acidcan be protected by being converted to an ester:
d.An amino group
can be protected by being converted to an amide:
6.Reaction of an 
aldehydeor a ketone
with a thiol forms a thioacetal or a thioketal (Section18.9):
7.Desulfurization of 
thioacetalsand thioketals
forms alkanes (Section18.9):
8.Reaction of an 
aldehydeor a ketone
with a phosphonium ylide (a Wittig reaction) forms an alkene (Section18.10):
9.Reactions of -
unsaturated aldehydes
and ketones
with nucleophiles (Section18.13):
Nucleophiles that are weak bases (RSH,) and form conjugate addition products. Nucleophiles that are
strong bases (RLi,RMgBr,and ) form direct addition products with reactive carbonyl groups and conjugate addition products

with less reactive carbonyl groups.
HR2CuLiBrRNH2,CN,ORCHCHCR
OHRCHdirect additionconjugate additionCHCRONuRCHCH2CRNuHNua,bC(C6H5)3PCRRC(C
6H5)3PORROCCRRRRH2Raney NiSRSRCRRCH2RRSRSRCRRH2OOR2 RSHRHClCRHCl
ORCl
ORNHR
NH2CCCH3OHH
2OOROH
OROCH
3HClexcessCC(CH3)3SiClOSi(CH3)3RROH
(CH3CH2)3NH2OHOCH2CH2OHHClOCRRRRCOOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 778
Problems77910.Reactions of -
unsaturatedcarboxylic acid derivatives
with nucleophiles (Section18.14):
Nucleophiles form nucleophilic acyl substitution products with reactive carbonyl groups and conjugate addition products with le
ssreactive carbonyl groups.
RCHRCHRCHCHCClNuH
OCHCNuHCl
Onucleophilic acylsubstitutionCHCNHRNuH
ONuOconjugate additionRCHCH2CNHRa,bKey Terms
acetal (p.755)
aldehyde (p.731)

conjugate addition (p.769)

cyanohydrin (p.741)

deoxygenation (p.752)

disconnection (p.766)

direct addition (p.769)

enamine (p.747)

gem
-diol (p.753)
hemiacetal (p.755)

hemiketal (p.756)
hydrate (p.753)
hydrazone (p.751)

imine (p.747)

ketal (p.756)

ketone (p.731)

nucleophilic acyl substitution (p.737)

nucleophilic addition (p.737)

nucleophilic additionÐeliminationreaction (p.738)
oxime (p.751)

phenylhydrazone (p.751)
pHÐrate profile (p.749)
prochiral carbonyl carbon (p.765)

protecting group (p.758)

Reand Sifaces (p.765)
reduction reaction (p.743)

Schiff base (p.747)

semicarbazone (p.751)

synthetic equivalent (p.766)

synthon (p.766)

Wittig reaction (p.761)

ylide (p.761)
Problems
40.Draw the structure for each of the following compounds:
a.isobutyraldehydef.4-bromo-3-heptanone
b.4-hexenalg.

c.diisopentyl ketoneh.2-ethylcyclopentanecarbaldehyde

d.3-methylcyclohexanonei.4-methyl-5-oxohexanal

e.2,4-pentanedionej.benzene-1,3-dicarbaldehyde
41.Give the products of each of the following reactions:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
NaCN
HClexcessCH3OOCH3CH2CCH31. NaBH42. H3OOHOCH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CCH3HClOCCH2CH3NH2NH2HOOCH3CH2CH2COCH2CH31. LiAlH42. H3OOCCH2CH3NH2NH2catalyticHOCH3CH2CCH2CH3NaCN
HClexcessOCH3CH2CHCH3CH2OHHClexcessg-bromocaproaldehydeBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 779
780CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II42.List the following compounds in order of decreasing reactivity toward nucleophilic attack:
43.a.Show the reagents required to form the primary alcohol.
b.Which of the reactions cannot be used for the synthesis of isobutyl alcohol?
c.Which of the reactions changes the carbon skeleton of the starting material?
44.Using cyclohexanone as the starting material,describe how each of the following compounds could be synthesized:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.i.
45.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
46.List the following compounds in order of decreasing for hydrate formation:
ClCOO2NCH3OCH3COCH3COCH3COCH3eqOCH3HOCH2CH2CH2CH2HClCH3OHOOCHCH2CH3(show two methods)N(CH3)2Br(show two methods)CH2NH2CHCH
2NH2OHRCH2OHOCRRCHCH2H2CORCH2BrRCH2OCH3HOCROH
OCROR
OCRCl
OCOOCRROCH3CH2CHCCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CHCCCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2CCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH2CHCCHCH2CH3OCH3CH2CCH2CH3OCH3CH3CH3CH2CHOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 780
Problems78147.Fill in the boxes:
a.b.48.Give the products of each of the following reactions:
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.i.
e.j.
49.Thiols can be prepared from the reaction of thiourea with an alkyl halide,followed by hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis.
a.Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
b.What thiol would be formed if the alkyl halide employed were pentyl bromide?
50.The only organic compound obtained when compound Z undergoes the following sequence of reactions gives the 
spectrum shown. Identify compound Z.
4Offset: 0.2 ppm.876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequencyCompound ZMnO21. phenylmagnesium bromide2. H3O1H NMRthioureaureaethanethiolH2NNH
2CH2NNH
2CS1. CH3CH2Br2. HO, H2OCH3CH2SHOCH22CHCOCH
3CH3NH2OOCH3OHHClCH3CCHCCH
3HBrOCH3CH3CH2COCH3Oexcess1. CH3CH2MgBr2. H3OO(CH3CH2)2NHcatalyticHO(C6H5)3PCHCH
3OCH3CH2NH2catalyticHCH3CH2CCH3O1. CH3CH2MgBr2. H3OONH1. LiAlH42. H2OCNCH
2CH3H2OHClCH2CH3CH4CH3CH2CH2OHCH3Br1.2.CH3OHCH
3CH2OHCH3Br1.2.BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 781
782CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II51.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.52.How many signals would the product of the following reaction show in these spectra
a.its spectrum

b.its spectrum
53.Give the products of the following rections. Show all stereoisomers that are formed.
a.c.
b.d.
54.List three different sets of reagents (a carbonyl compound and a Grignard reagent) that could be used to prepare each of the
following tertiary alcohols:
a.b.
55.Give the product of the reaction of 3-methyl-2-cyclohexenone with each of the following reagents:
a.followed byd.HBr

b.excess NaCN,HCle.followed by

c.Pdf.
56.Norlutinand Enovidare ketones that suppress ovulation. Consequently,they have been used clinically as contraceptives. For
which of these compounds would you expect the infrared carbonyl absorption (stretch) to be at a higher frequency?

Explain.CCH
OOOHCCH
OHNorlutinEnovidCO¨¨CH3CH2SHH2,H3O(CH3CH2)2CuLiH3OCH3MgBrCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OHCH2CH3CH3CH2CCH2CH2CH2CH3OHCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH2CH3O1. LiAlH42. H3OO1. CH3MgBrCH32. H3OCCH2CH3ONHcatalyticHO1. (CH3)2CuLi2. H3OCH3CCH2CH2COCH3OO1. excess CH3MgBr2. H3O13C NMR1HNMRHClH2OOCH3OOCH2CH3OHClOCH3CH2OHCH2CH2CH2NH3HClH2OOBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 782
Problems78357.A compound gives the following IR spectrum. Upon reaction with sodium borohydride followed by acidification,the product with
 thefollowing spectrum is formed. Identify the compounds.
58.Unlike a phosphonium ylide,which reacts with an aldehyde or ketone to form an alkene,a sulfonium ylide reacts with an aldehy
deor ketone to form an epoxide. Explain why one ylide forms an alkene,whereas the other forms an epoxide.
59.Indicate how the following compounds could be prepared from the given starting materials:
a.d.
b.e.
c.CH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2CH2COHOOHNHCH
3COCH3OCHOCH3CH3ONHNHCOCH3OCCH3OHCH3CH3CH2CH(CH
3)2SCH
2CH3CH2CHOCH2CH3SCH3O87653210
4frequency (ppm)2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wavenumber (cm1)% Transmittance1HNMRBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 783
784CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II60.Propose a reasonable mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.61.a.In aqueous solution,
D-glucose exists in equilibrium with two six-membered ring compounds. Draw the structures of these
compounds.b.Which of the six-membered ring compounds will be present in greater amount?
62.The spectrum of the alkyl bromide used to make the ylide to form a compound with molecular formula is shown
below. What product is obtained from the Wittig reaction?
63.In the presence of an acid catalyst,acetaldehyde forms a trimer known as paraldehyde. Because it induces sleep when it is
administered to animals in large doses,paraldehyde is used as a sedative or hypnotic. Propose a mechanism for the formation of

paraldehyde.64.The addition of hydrogen cyanide to benzaldehyde forms a compound called mandelonitrile. 
(R)-Mandelonitrile is formed from thehydrolysis of amygdalin,a compound found in the pits of peaches and apricots. Amygdalin is the principal constituent of laetril
e,a
compound that was once highly touted as a treatment for cancer. The drug was subsequently found to be ineffective. Is

(R)-mandelonitrile formed by attack of cyanide ion on the 
Reface or the 
Siface of benzaldehyde?
CHHClNaCexcessNOCHCN
OHmandelonitrileCH3CHHClOOOOH3CCH3CH3paraldehyde4876
9103210
53.23.1
3.0PPM
3.63.5
3.4PPM
 (ppm)frequencyC11H141H NMRCH2OHHCO
OHOHHHOHHHOHD-glucoseCH3OCH3OCOHOOCCH3OHClCH3OHCH3CCH2CH2COCH2CH3CH3CH2OHOOH3CH3COO1. CH3MgBr2. H3OBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 784
Problems78565.What carbonyl compound and what phosphonium ylide are needed to synthesize the following compounds?
a.b.c.d.
66.Identify compounds A and B:
67.Propose a reasonable mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.68.A compound reacts with methylmagnesium bromide followed by acidification to form the product with the following 
spectrum. Identify the compound.69.Show how each of the following compounds can be prepared from the given starting material. In each case,you will need to use
 aprotecting group.a.c.
b.ClOHCOOHOHCCH3CH3OOBrCH
2CH2OHCCH3CHCH2COCH3OOHCH3CHCH2CCH3CH3OHOH87653210
4frequency (ppm)1H NMRHHOOHNHOHNCHClOOOCH3OCH3OCH2CHCCH2CHCH3A1. (CH22. H3OCH3CH3OHCH)2CuLiB1. CH3Li2. H3OCH2CHCHCHCH2CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CHBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 785
786CHAPTER 18Car
bonyl Compounds II70.When a cyclic ketone reacts with diazomethane,the next larger cyclic ketone is formed. This is called a ring expansion react
ion.Provide a mechanism for this reaction.
71.The values of oxaloacetic acid are 2.22 and 3.98.
a.Which carboxyl group is more acidic?
b.The amount of hydrate present in an aqueous solution of oxaloacetic acid depends on the pH of the solution:95% at 
81% at 35% at 13% at 6% at and 6% at Explain this pH dependence.
72.The 
HornerÐEmmons modification
is a variation of a Wittig reaction in which a phosphonate-stabilized carbanion in used instead
of a phosphonium ylide.The phosphonate-stabilized carbanion is prepared from an appropriate alkyl halide. This is called the 
Arbuzov reaction.
Because the Arbuzov reaction can be carried out with an ketone or an ester (in which case it is called a 
Perkow
reaction
),it provides a way to synthesize -unsaturated ketones and esters.
a.Propose a mechanism for the Arbuzov reaction.
b.Propose a mechanism for the Horner
ÐEmmons modification.
c.Show how the following compounds can be prepared from the given starting material:
CH3CH2CH1.OCHCCH3OCH3CH3CH2CHO2.OO(EtO)3P(EtO)
2PCH2CRCH
2CRBrCH3CH2Br(EtO)2PCHCR
OOOOO
strongbasea,ba-bromoa-bromo(EtO)3PCH
3CHCH3CH3CH2BrBrP(OEt)2CH3CHCH3OP(OEt)2CH3CCH3OstrongbaseOP(OEt)2CH3CEt CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3RRRROCCP(OEt)2OOCpH12.7.pH6.7,pH4.7,pH3.1,pH1.3,pH0,OHHOOOOoxaloacetic acidpaCH2N2NOOcycloheptanonecyclohexanonediazomethane
BRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 786
Problems78773.In order to solve this problem,you must read the description of the Hammett treatment given in Chapter17,Problem76.
When the rate constants for the hydrolysis of several morpholine enamines of para-substituted propiophenones are determined at
the value is positive; however,when the rates of hydrolysis are determined at the value is negative.
a.What is the rate-determining step of the hydrolysis reaction when it is carried out in a basic solution?

b.What is the rate-determining step of the reaction when it is carried out in an acidic solution?
74.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.d.CHCCH3CH3CHCH3CHCH2CCH3HHOOONN2. HCl, H2OCH3CH2SHOHSCH2CH3OHOOHClH2OO(HOCH2CH2CH2)2CHCHOOCCH3OCH3BrCCH
3OHClH2O1.39 (pH4.7)1.29 (pH10.4)2024log kobsd (s1)a morpholine enamine ofa para-substituted propiophenoneCCHZCH3NOrpH10.4,rpH4.7,s, rBRUI18-731_787r3  28-03-2003  1:33 PM  Page 787
acetyl-CoA78819Carbonyl Compounds IIIReactions at the -Carbon
aWhenyou studied the reac-
tions of carbonyl compounds

in Chapters17and 18,you saw
that their site of reactivity is the partially

positively charged carbonyl carbon,which is

attacked by nucleophiles.
Aldehydes,ketones,esters,and 
N,N-disubstituted amides have a second site of
reactivity. A hydrogen bonded to 
a carbon adjacent to a carbonyl carbon
is sufficiently
acidic to be removed by a strong base. The carbon adjacent to a carbonyl carbon is called

an A hydrogen bonded to an is called an 
In Section19.1,you will find out why a hydrogen bonded to a carbon adjacent to a
carbonyl carbon is more acidic than other hydrogens attached to hybridized car-

bons,and you will look at some reactions that result from this acidity. At the end of

this chapter,you will see that a proton is not the only substituent that can be removed

from an A carboxyl group bonded to an can be removed as 

Finally,you will be introduced to some synthetic schemes that rely on being able to re-

move protons and carboxyl groups from 
a-carbons.CO2.a-carbona-carbon:sp3RCHC
ORbaseHRCHC
ORbaseHan   -hydrogen
an   -carbon
A-hydrogen.a-carbonA-carbon.RCH2CORRCH
2CRONuNuBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 788
Section 19.1Acidity of -Hydrogens
789a19.1Acidity of -Hydrogens
Hydrogen and carbon have similar electronegativities,which means that the electrons
binding them together are shared almost equally by the two atoms. Consequently,a

hydrogen bonded to a carbon is usually not acidic. This is particularly true for hydro-

gens bonded to hybridized carbons,because these carbons are the most similar to

hydrogen in electronegativity (Section6.9). The high of ethane is evidence of the

low acidity of hydrogens bonded to hybridized carbons.
A hydrogen bonded to an hybridized carbon adjacent to a carbonyl carbon is
much more acidic than hydrogens bonded to other hybridized carbons. For example,

the for dissociation of an from an aldehyde or a ketone ranges from 16

to 20,and the for dissociation of an from an ester is about 25

(Table19.1). Notice that,although an is more acidic than most other

carbon-bound hydrogens,it is less acidic than a hydrogen of water A

compound that contains a relatively acidic hydrogen bonded to an hybridized carbon

is called a carbon acid.ORCHCORORCHCRORCHCHpKa  25pKa  1620sp3pa15.7.a-hydrogena-hydrogenpaa-hydrogenpasp3sp3CHCHpKa  50sp3pasp3ATable 19.1
The pKa Values of Some Carbon Acids
OCH2CN(CH3)2HOCH2COCH2CH3HOCH2CCH3HCH2CNHOCH2CHHCH3CHNO230252025178.6HNNCCHC
HOOCH3CCHCOCH2CH3HOOCCHCCH3HOOCH3CCHCCH3HOOCH3CCHCHHO2NCHNO211.810.79.48.9
5.93.6HpKapKaBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 789
790CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIWhy is a hydrogen bonded to an hybridized carbon that is adjacent to a carbonyl
carbon so much more acidic than hydrogens bonded to other hybridized carbons?

An is more acidic because the base formed when the proton is removed

from the is more stable than the base formed when a proton is removed from

other hybridized carbons,and acid strength is determined by the stability of the

conjugate base that is formed when the acid gives up a proton (Section1.17).
Why is the base more stable? When a proton is removed from ethane,the electrons
left behind reside solely on a carbon atom. Because carbon is not very electronegative,

a carbanion is relatively unstable and therefore difficult to form. As a result,the of

its conjugate acid is very high.
When a proton is removed from a carbon adjacent to a carbonyl carbon,two factors
combine to increase the stability of the base that is formed. First,the electrons left be-

hind when the proton is removed are delocalized,and electron delocalization increas-

es the stability of a compound (Section7.6). More important,the electrons are

delocalized onto an oxygen,an atom that is better able to accommodate the electrons

because it is more electronegative than carbon.
PROBLEM 1The of propene is 42,which is greater than the of the carbon acids listed in
Table19.1,but less than the of an alkane. Explain.
Now we can understand why aldehydes and ketones are more acidic
than esters The electrons left behind when an is removed from

an ester are not as readily delocalized onto the carbonyl oxygen as are the electrons left

behind when an is removed from an aldehyde or a ketone. Because a lone

pair on the oxygen of the OR group of the ester can also be delocalized onto the carbonyl

oxygen,the two pairs of electrons compete for delocalization onto oxygen.
Nitroalkanes,nitriles,and 
N,N-disubstituted amides also have relatively acidic
(Table19.1) because in each case the electrons left behind when the proton
is removed can be delocalized onto an atom that is more electronegative than carbon.
CHCHNOCHCHCNCH
CN(CH)OnitroethanepKa  8.6propanenitrilepKa  26N,N-dimethylacetamidepKa  30a-hydrogensa-hydrogena-hydrogenpa25.pa16Ð20papapaRCHC
ORHRCHC
ORRCH
CORresonance contributorselectrons are betteraccomodated on O
than on C  HdelocalizedelectronsCH3CH2HCH3CH3localized electronspasp3a-carbona-hydrogensp3sp3RCHC
OORRCHC
OORRCHC
OORdelocalization ofthe lone pair on
oxygendelocalization ofthe negative charge
on the   -carbon
resonance contributorsBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 790
2,4-pentanedioneSection 19.2KetoÐEnol Tautomerism
791If the is 
betweentwo carbonyl groups,the acidity of an is
even greater (Table19.1). For example,an of ethyl 3-oxobutyrate,a com-

pound with an between a ketone carbonyl group and an ester carbonyl group,

has a of 10.7. An of 2,4-pentanedione,a compound with an 

between two ketone carbonyl groups,has a of 8.9. Ethyl 3-oxobutyrate is classi-

fied as a because the ester has a carbonyl group at the 

2,4-Pentanedione is a The acidity of bonded to carbons flanked by two carbonyl groups in-
creases because the electrons left behind when the proton is removed can be delocal-

ized onto 
twooxygen atoms. have lower values than esters
because electrons are more readily delocalized onto ketone carbonyl groups than they

are onto ester carbonyl groups.
PROBLEM 2Give an example of
a.a nitrileb.a 
PROBLEM 3List the compounds in each of the following groups in order of decreasing acidity:
19.2KetoÐEnol Tautomerism
A ketone exists in equilibrium with its enol tautomer. You were introduced to tau-
tomers in Section6.6. Recall that 
tautomersare isomers that are in rapid equilibrium.Keto
Ðenol tautomers differ in the location of a double bond and a hydrogen.
RCH2CROHRketo tautomerenol tautomer
ORCHC
ONCH3OOOc.CHOCCHCOCHOOCHCCHCCHb.OOCHCCHCOCHOOCHCCHOCHCHCHCHHCOCHa.CH
CHb-diesterb-ketob-ketopab-Diketonesa-hydrogensCHCCH
O2,4-pentanedioneacetylacetonea   -diketone
OCCH
CHCCH
Oethyl 3-oxobutyrateethyl acetoacetatea   -keto esterOCOCH
CHpKa  10.7pKa  8.9B-diketone.b-position.B-keto esterpaa-carbona-hydrogenpaa-carbona-hydrogena-hydrogena-carbonCHCCH
OCCH
OCHCCH
OCCH
OCHCCH
OCCH
Oresonance contributors for the 2,4-pentanedione anionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 791
792CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIFor most ketones,the enol tautomer is much less stable than the keto tautomer. For
example,an aqueous solution of acetone exists as an equilibrium mixture of more than

99.9% keto tautomer and less than 0.1% enol tautomer.
Thefraction of the enol tautomer in an aqueous solution is considerably greater for a
because the enol tautomer is stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding
and by conjugation of the carbon
Ðcarbon double bond with the second carbonyl group.
Phenol is unusual in that its enol tautomer is 
more
stable than its keto tautomer
because the enol tautomer is aromatic,but the keto tautomer is not.
PROBLEM 4Only 15% of 2,4-pentanedione exists as the enol tautomer in water,but 92% exists as the
enol tautomer in hexane. Explain why this is so.
Now that we know that a hydrogen on a carbon adjacent to a carbonyl carbon is
somewhat acidic,we can understand why keto and enol tautomers interconvert as we

first saw in Chapter6. 
KetoÐenol interconversion
is also called ketoÐenol tautomer-
izationor enolization. The interconversion of the tautomers can be catalyzed by either
acids or bases.In a basic solution,hydroxide ion removes a proton from the of the keto
tautomer. The anion that is formed has two resonance contributors:a carbanion and an

enolate ion. The enolate ion contributes more to the resonance hybrid because the

negative charge is better accommodated by oxygen than by carbon. Protonation on

oxygen forms the enol tautomer,whereas protonation on the reforms the

keto tautomer.
a-carbona-carbonketo tautomerOHenol tautomerOa hydrogen bond15%enol tautomer85%keto tautomerCCH3CH2OOCH3CCCH3CHOCH3CHOb-diketoneCH3CCH
3OHCH399.9%keto tautomer0.1%enol tautomerOCH2C3-D Molecules:Enol of acetone;
Enol of a -diketone
bprotonation of oxygenremoval of a protonfrom the -carbonRCHC
ORRCHC
ORHRCHC
ORRCH
enol tautomerCOHRHOHHOHOenolate ionketo tautomerbase-catalyzed ketoÐenol interconversionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 792
Section 19.3How Enols and Enolate Ions React
793In an acidic solution,the carbonyl oxygen of the keto tautomer is protonated and water
removes a proton from the forming the enol.
Notice that the steps are reversed in the base-and acid-catalyzed reactions. In the
base-catalyzed reaction,the base removes the in the first step and the

oxygen is protonated in the second step. In the acid-catalyzed reaction,the acid

protonates the oxygen in the first step and the is removed in the second

step. Notice also how the catalyst is regenerated in both the acid-and base-catalyzed

mechanisms.PROBLEM 5Draw the enol tautomers for each of the following compounds. For those compounds that
have more than one enol tautomer,indicate which is more stable.
19.3How Enols and Enolate Ions ReactThe carbonÐcarbon double bond of an enol suggests that it is a nucleophile
Ñlike an
alkene. An enol is more electron rich than an alkene because the oxygen atom donates

electrons by resonance. An enol,therefore,is a better nucleophile than an alkene.
Carbonyl compounds that form enols undergo substitution reactions at the 
When an reaction takes place under acidic conditions,water removes a

proton from the of the protonated carbonyl compound. The nucleophilic enol

then reacts with an electrophile. The overall reaction is an 
Ñone electrophile is substituted for another (H
).(E)A-substitution reactiona-carbona-substitutiona-carbon.RCHC
OHRRCHC
OHRresonance contributors of an enolelectron-rich   -carbonf.CH
CCHOd.OOCCHOb.e.CH
CHCCHCCHCHOOOc.CHCHCCHCHOa.a-protona-protonprotonationof oxygenremoval of a proton
from the -carbonRCH2COROHHHCOHRRCH
enol tautomerCOHRH3ORCHHH2Oketo tautomeracid-catalyzed ketoÐenol interconversiona-carbon,BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 793
794CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIWhen an reaction takes place under basic conditions,a base removes
a proton from the and the nucleophilic enolate ion then reacts with an elec-

trophile. Enolate ions are much better nucleophiles than enols because they are nega-

tively charged.
The resonance contributors of the enolate ion show that it has two electron-rich
sites:the and the oxygen. The enolate ion is an example of an 
ambident nu-
cleophile(ambiis Latin for 
ÒbothÓ; dentis Latin for 
ÒteethÓ). An ambident nucleo-phileis a nucleophile with two nucleophilic sites (
Òtwo teeth
Ó).Which nucleophilic site (C or O) reacts with the electrophile depends on the elec-
trophile and on the reaction conditions. Protonation occurs preferentially on oxygen

because of the greater concentration of negative charge on the more electronegative

oxygen atom. However,when the electrophile is something other than a proton,

carbon is more likely to be the nucleophile because carbon is a better nucleophile

than oxygen.Notice the similarity between keto
Ðenol interconversion and Actu-
ally,keto
Ðenol interconversion is an reaction in which hydrogen
serves as both the electrophile that is removed from the and the elec-

trophile that is added to the (when the enol or enolate reverts back to the

keto tautomer).
As various reactions are discussed in this chapter,notice that they
all follow basically the same mechanism:A base removes a proton from an 

and the resulting enol or enolate reacts with an electrophile. The reactions differ

only in the nature of the base and the electrophileÑand in whether the reactions arecarried out under acidic or basic conditions.a-carbona-substitutiona-carbona-carbona-substitutiona-substitution.RCHC
ORCORresonance contributors of an enolate ionelectron-rich oxygenelectron-rich   -carbonRCHa-carbona-carbona-substitution3-D Molecule:Enolate of acetoneRCHC
OHRRCHC
OHRRCHC
OHRRCHHCORRCHEECORH3OHOHHHEEH2O  -substituted product Electrophile  acid-catalyzed -substitution reactionenolHOHORCHC
ORCRRCHHCOORRCH
ECORE  Ðsubstituted productenolate ionHOHORCHbase-catalyzed -substitution reactionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 794
Section 19.4Halogenation of the -Carbon of Aldehydes and Ketones
795aPROBLEM 6Explain why the aldehydic hydrogen (the one attached to the carbonyl carbon) is not
exchanged with deuterium.
19.4Halogenation of the -Carbon
of Aldehydes and KetonesAcid-Catalyzed HalogenationWhen or is added to an 
acidicsolution of an aldehyde or a ketone,a halogen
replaces oneof the of the carbonyl compound.
In the first step of this acid-catalyzed reaction,the carbonyl oxygen is protonated.
Water is the base that removes a proton from the forming an enol that reacts

with an electrophilic halogen.Base-Promoted Halogenation
When excess or is added to a 
basicsolution of an aldehyde or a ketone,
the halogen replaces allthe CH2RBr
2ORRC2 Br
COHORCBrBrexcessa-hydrogens.I2Cl2,Br2,a-carbon,HClH3OH3OOCl2OHIOCCHCH3I2OCCH2CH3ClIa-hydrogensI2Cl2,Br2,ACH3CHOCD3CHOODD2OUnder acidic conditions, one is substituted for a halogen.A-hydrogenOCCH3H3OH3OOHCCH2OHCCH2BrBrBrBrHOHCCH2H2OH2OOCCH2BrHOHHacid-catalyzed halogenation3-D Molecule:-BromoacetoneaUnder basic conditions, all theare substituted for
halogens.A-hydrogensBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 795
796CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIIn the first step of this base-promoted reaction,hydroxide ion removes a proton
from the The enolate ion then reacts with the electrophilic bromine. These

two steps are repeated until all the are replaced by bromine.
Each successive halogenation is 
more rapid
than the previous one because the electron-
withdrawing bromine increases the acidity of the remaining This is why

allthe are replaced by bromines. Under acidic conditions,on the other
hand,each successive halogenation is 
slowerthan the previous one because the electron-
withdrawing bromine decreases the basicity of the carbonyl oxygen,thereby making

protonation of the carbonyl oxygen less favorable.
The Haloform ReactionIn the presence of excess base and excess halogen,a methyl ketone is first converted

into a trihalo-substituted ketone. Then hydroxide ion attacks the carbonyl carbon of the

trihalo-substituted ketone. Because the trihalomethyl ion is a weaker base than hy-

droxide ion (the of is 14; the of is 15.7),the trihalomethyl ion is the

group more easily expelled from the tetrahedral intermediate,so the final product is a

carboxylic acid. The conversion of a methyl ketone to a carboxylic acid is called 

a haloform reaction
because one of the products is haloformÑ(chloroform),(bromoform),or (iodoform). Before spectroscopy became a routine ana-
lytical tool,the haloform reaction served as a test for methyl ketones. The presence of a

methyl ketone was indicated by the formation of iodoform,a bright yellow compound.
PROBLEM 7Why do only methyl ketones undergo the haloform reaction?
PROBLEM 8A ketone undergoes acid-catalyzed bromination,acid-catalyzed chlorination,and acid-cat-
alyzed deuterium exchange at the all at about the same rate. What does this tell

you about the mechanism of the reactions?19.5Halogenation of the -Carbon of Carboxylic
Acids: The HellÐVolhard
ÐZelinski ReactionCarboxylic acids do not undergo substitution reactions at the because a base will
remove a proton from the OH group rather than from the since the OH group is

more acidic. If,however,a carboxylic acid is treated with and then the 

can be brominated. (Red phosphorus can be used in place of since P and excess 

react to form ) This halogenation reaction is called the 
HellÐVolhard
ÐZelinskiPBr3.Br2PBr3,a-carbonBr2,PBr3a-carbon,a-carbonAa-carbon,CHI3CHBr3CHCl3H2OpaCHI3paa-hydrogensa-hydrogens.a-hydrogensa-carbon.RCOCH3RCOCI3RCOOHCI3RHOCOOCHI3RCOOHCI3HOI2the haloform reactiona trihalo-substituted
ketoneexcessexcessRCHC
ORHBrBrH2OBrHORCHC
ORBrRCC
ORBrBrrepeat firsttwo stepsbase-promoted halogenationRCHC
ORCRORCHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 796
Section 19.6-Halogenated Carbonyl Compounds in Synthesis
797aCarl Magnus von Hell (1849
Ð1926)was born in Germany. He studied

with Hermann von Fehling at the

University of Stuttgart and with

Richard Erlenmeyer (1825Ð1909) at

the University of Munich. Von Hell

reported the HVZ reaction in 1881,

and the reaction was independently

confirmed by both Volhard and

Zelinski in 1887.Jacob Volhard (1834
Ð1910)wasalso born in Germany. Brilliant,but

lacking direction,he was sent by his

parents to England to be with August

von Hofmann (Section21.5),a family

friend. After working with Hofmann,

Volhard became a professor of

chemistry,first at the University 

of Munich,then at the University of

Erlangen,and later at the University

of Halle. He was the first to

synthesize sarcosine and creatine.
Nikolai Dimitrievich Zelinski
(1861Ð1953)was born in Moldavia.He was a professor of chemistry at

the University of Moscow. In 1911,

he left the university to protest the

firing of the entire administration by

the Ministry of Education. He went to
St. Petersburg,where he directed the

laboratory of the Ministry of

Finances. In 1917,after the Russian

Revolution,he returned to the

University of Moscow.
reaction
or,more simply,the 
HVZ reaction
. You will see when you examine the mecha-
nism of the HVZ reaction that occurs because an acyl bromide,rather than

a carboxylic acid,is the compound that undergoes 
In the first step of the HVZ reaction,converts the carboxylic acid into an acyl
bromide by a mechanism similar to the one by which converts an alcohol into an

alkyl bromide (Section12.3). (Notice that in both reactions replaces an OH with a

Br.) The acyl bromide is in equilibrium with its enol. Bromination of the enol forms the
acyl bromide,which is hydrolyzed to the carboxylic acid.
19.6-Halogenated Carbonyl Compoundsin SynthesisYou have seen that when a base removes a proton from an of an aldehyde
or a ketone (Section19.2),the becomes 
nucleophilicÑit reacts withelectrophiles.However,when the is halogenated,the becomes 
electrophilic
Ñitreacts with nucleophiles. Therefore,both electrophiles and nucleophiles can be placed

on -carbons.OONuNuOBrBrH3OBr2-carbon reactswith electrophilesaa-carbona-positionbase-carbon reactswith electrophilesOOOO
EEa-carbona-carbonAOHCH
3CH2BrCCH
3CHOPBr3BrCOHBrCH3CHBr
CBrBrCH3CH2COOHCH
3CHBr
COH2OCH3CHC
OBrBrHBr
Bra carboxylic acidan acyl bromide
mechanism for the HellÐVolhardÐZelinski reactionenolan   -brominated
carboxylic acidan   -brominated
acyl bromideOHa-brominateda-brominatedPBr3PBr3PBr3RCH2COHthe HVZ reactionORCHCOHO1.  PBr3 (or P), Br22.  H2O Bra-substitution.a-substitutionTutorial:
-Halogenated carbonylcompounds in synthesisaBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 797
carbonyl compounds are also useful to synthetic chemists because
once a bromine has been introduced into the of a carbonyl compound,

an carbonyl compound can be prepared by means of an E2 elimina-

tion reaction,using a strong and bulky base to encourage elimination over substitution

(Section11.8).
PROBLEM 9How would you prepare the following compounds from the given starting materials?
PROBLEM 10How could the following compounds be prepared from a carbonyl compound with no
carbonÐcarbon double bonds?PROBLEM 11How could the following compounds be prepared from cyclohexanone?
19.7Using LDA to Form an EnolateThe amount of carbonyl compound converted to enolate depends on the of the
carbonyl compound and the particular base used to remove the For

example,when hydroxide ion (the of its conjugate acid is 15.7) is used to remove

an from cyclohexanone only a small amount of the carbonyl
pa17,a-hydrogenpaa-hydrogen.pad.OCHb.OCNc.OSCHa.OCNOCH3CCHCH
2b.OCH3CHCHCCH
2CH2CH3a.d.OOOb.CH
CHCHOCHCHCHOOHc.OOOCH3CHCHCHa.OCHCHCHON(CH)tert-BuOtert-BuOHOOan   ,  -unsaturatedcarbonyl compoundBrBra,b-unsaturateda-positiona-Brominated798CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 798
Section 19.8Alkylation of the -Carbon of Carbonyl Compounds
799acompound is converted into the enolate because hydroxide ion is a weaker base than
the base being formed. (Recall that the equilibrium of an acid
Ðbase reaction favors
reaction of the strong acid and formation of the weak acid,Section1.17.)
In contrast,when lithium diisopropylamide (LDA) is used to remove the 
(the of LDA
Õs conjugate acid is about 35),essentially all the carbonyl compound
is converted to enolate because LDA is a much stronger base than the base being

formed (Section1.17). Therefore,LDA is the base of choice for those reactions that

require the carbonyl compound to be completely converted to enolate before it reacts

with an electrophile.Using a nitrogen base to form an enolate can be a problem because a nitrogen basecan also react as a nucleophile and attack the carbonyl carbon (Section18.6). Howev-

er,the two bulky alkyl substituents bonded to the nitrogen of LDAmake it difficult for

the nitrogen to get close enough to the carbonyl carbon to react with it. Consequently,

LDA is a strong base but a poor nucleophile,so it removes an much faster

than it attacks a carbonyl carbon. LDA is easily prepared by adding butyllithium to di-

isopropylamine (DIA) in THF at 
19.8Alkylation of the -Carbon of
Carbonyl CompoundsAlkylation of the of a carbonyl compound is an important reaction because it
gives us another way to form a carbon
Ðcarbon bond. Alkylation is carried out by first
removing a proton from the with a strong base such as LDA and then adding

the appropriate alkyl halide. Because the alkylation is an reaction,it works best

with methyl halides and primary alkyl halides (Section10.2).
Ketones,esters,and nitriles can be alkylated at the in this way. Aldehydes,
however,give poor yields of products (Section19.11).
a-alkylateda-carbonOBrOCH3CH2BrOLDA/THFCH2CH3OSN2a-carbona-carbonA78 ¡C.a-hydrogenOOOLDADIApKa  35100%pKa  17paa-protonOOHOH2OpKa  15.7 0.1%pKa  17OCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2LiCH3CH3THFCH3CHNCHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH3LiCH3CHNHCHCH378 Clithium diisopropylamideLDAbutanepKa  50butyllithiumdiisopropylaminepKa  353-D Molecule:Lithium diisopropylamide
(LDA)BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 799
800CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III3-D Molecule:2-MethylcyclohexanoneTwo different products can be formed when the ketone is not symmetrical,because
either can be alkylated.For example,methylation of 2-methylcyclohexanone

with one equivalent of methyl iodide forms both 2,6-dimethylcyclohexanone and

2,2-dimethylcyclohexanone. The relative amounts of the two products depend on the

reaction conditions.The enolate leading to 2,6-dimethylcyclohexanone is the 
kineticenolate because thethat is removed to make this enolate is more accessible (particularly if a hin-
dered base like LDA is used) and slightly more acidic. So 2,6-dimethylcyclohexanone is

formed faster and is the major product if the reaction is carried out at 
The enolate leading to 2,2-dimethylcyclohexanone is the 
thermodynamicenolatebecause it has the more substituted double bond,making it the more stable enolate.

(Alkyl substitution increases enolate stability for the same reason that alkyl substitu-

tion increases alkene stability,Section4.11.) Therefore,2,2-dimethylcyclohexanone is

the major product if the reaction is carried out under conditions that cause enolate for-

mation to be reversible and if a less hindered base (KH) is used.
The less substituted can be alkylated
Ñwithout having to control the con-
ditions to make certain that the reaction does not become reversible
Ñby first making
the N,N-dimethylhydrazone of the ketone.
a-carbon78 ¡C.a-hydrogenOOLDAOCH3ICH
3IOH3C2,6-dimethylcyclohexanoneO2,2-dimethylcyclohexanoneCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH32-methylcyclohexanonea-carbon1.  LDA/THF2.  CH3CH2lCH3CH2CH2CNCH2COCH31.  LDA/THF2.  CH3lOOCHCOCH3CH3CH2CHCN
CH3CH2CH3CH3NNH2H2OCH3HClNCH3NCH3OBuLian N,N-dimethyl-hydrazoneOCH3CH3CH2BrCH3NCH3NCH3NCH3NCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3NNH3NCH3NCH3 LiCH3Bu+BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 800
Section 19.8Alkylation of the -Carbon of Carbonyl Compounds
801a3-D Molecule:N,N-Dimethylhydrazone of2-methylcyclohexanoneHermann Kolbe (1818
Ð1884)andRudolph Schmitt (1830Ð1898)were
born in Germany. Kolbe was a

professor at the Universities of

Marburg and Leipzig. Schmitt

received a Ph.D. from the University

of Marburg and was a professor at

the University of Dresden. Kolbe

discovered how to prepare aspirin in

1859. Schmitt modified the synthesis

in 1885,making aspirin available in

large quantities at a low price.
THE SYNTHESIS OF ASPIRINThe first step in the industrial synthesis of aspirin

is known as the 
Kolbe
ÐSchmitt carboxylationreaction
. The phenolate ion reacts with carbon dioxide under
pressure to form o-hydroxybenzoic acid,also known as sali-
cylic acid. Acetylation of salicylic acid with acetic acid forms

acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin).
During World War I,the American subsidiary of the Bayer
Company bought as much phenol as it could from the interna-

tional market,knowing that eventually all the phenol could be

converted into aspirin. This left little phenol available for other

countries to purchase for the synthesis of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol

(TNT),a common explosive.
O(CH3C)2OOOCO
OCHOOOHOH
COH
OCOH
OCOOHClOCOH3Csalicylic acido-hydroxybenzoic acidacetylsalicylic acidaspirinThe N,N-dimethylhydrazonewill form so that the dimethylamino group is pointing
away from the more substituted The nitrogen of the dimethylamino group

directs the base to the less substituted carbon by coordinating with the lithium ion of

butyllithium the base generally employed in this reaction. Hydrolysis of the

hydrazone reforms the ketone (Section18.6).
(BuLi),a-carbon.PROBLEM 12What compound is formed when cyclohexanone is shaken with NaOD in for several
hours?PROBLEM 13Explain why alkylation of an works best if the alkyl halide used in the reaction is

a primary alkyl halide and why it does not work at all if it is a tertiary alkyl halide.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
How could you prepare 4-methyl-3-hexanone from a ketone containing no more than six

carbon atoms?Two sets of ketone and alkyl halide could be used for the synthesis:3-hexanone and a
methyl halide or 3-pentanone and an ethyl halide.3-Pentanone and an ethyl halide are the preferred starting materials. Because 3-pentanone
is symmetrical,only one ketone will be formed. In contrast,3-hexanone can

form two different enolates,so two ketones can be formed.
a-substituteda-substitutedCH3CH2CCH2CH3CH3CH2BrO3-pentanoneCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3CH3Bror
O3-hexanoneCH3CH2CCHCH2CH3OCH34-methyl-3-hexanonea-carbonD2OBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 801
Now continue on to Problem 14.
PROBLEM 14How could each of the following compounds be prepared from a ketone and an alkyl
halide?19.9Alkylation and Acylation of the -Carbon via 
an Enamine IntermediateWe have seen that an enamine is formed when an aldehyde or a ketone reacts with a
secondary amine (Section18.6).
Enamines react with electrophiles in the same way that enolates do.
NENenamineenolate
OEOEEOH2ONHNenaminecatalyticHpyrrolidinesecondary amineAOCH2CHCCH2CH3CH3Oa.  CH3CCH2CH2CHCH2b.802CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIICH3CH2CCH2CH3O3-pentanoneCH3CH2CCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH2CCHCH3OCH3CH2CCHCH2CH3O3-hexanoneLDACH3CH2BrLDACH3BrCH3BrCH3CH2CCHCH3OCH3CHCCH2CH2CH3OCH3CH2CCHCH2CH3OCH3CHCCH2CH2CH3OCH2CH34-methyl-3-hexanoneCH34-methyl-3-hexanoneCH32-methyl-3-hexanoneBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 802
Section 19.9Alkylation and Acylation of the -Carbon via an Enamine Intermediate
803aThis means that electrophiles can be added to the of an aldehyde or a ketone by
first converting the carbonyl compound to an enamine (by treating the carbonyl

compound with a secondary amine),adding the electrophile,and then hydrolyzing the

imine back to the ketone.
Becausethe alkylation step is an reaction,only primary alkyl halides or methyl
halides should be used (Section10.2).
One advantage to using an enamine intermediate to alkylate an aldehyde or a ketone
is that only the monoalkylated product is formed.
In contrast,when a carbonyl compound is alkylated directly,dialkylated and O-alkylated
products can also be formed.In addition to being able to be alkylated,aldehydes and ketones can also be acylated
via an enamine intermediate.Notice that the of an aldehyde or a ketone can be made to react with an
electrophile
either by first treating the carbonyl compound with LDA or by converting
the carbonyl compound to an enamine.
LDAOOOEEa-carbonONNNHOOCCH3ClNOCCH3OCCH3ClCH3CClOH2OHClNHHcatalyticHOO1.  LDA2.  CH3BrOH3C
OCH3CH3CH3CH3OCH3OO1.  secondary amine     catalytic H2.  CH3Br3.  HCl, H2OCH3SN2a-carbon3-D Molecule:Pyrrolidine enamine of
cyclohexanoneNHNNan enamineNCH3BrOOHClH2OCH3CH3HHcatalyticHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 803
Alternatively,the of an aldehyde or a ketone can be made to react with a
nucleophileby first brominating the of the carbonyl compound.
PROBLEM 15Describe how the following compounds could be prepared using an enamine intermediate:
a.b.
19.10Alkylation of the -Carbon: 
The Michael ReactionIn Section18.13,you saw that nucleophiles react with aldehydes and
ketones,forming either direct addition products or conjugate addition products; in

Section18.14,you saw that nucleophiles react with carboxylic acid

derivatives,forming either nucleophilic acyl substitution products or conjugate addi-

tion products.When the nucleophile is an enolate,the addition reaction has a special name
Ñit iscalled a Michael reaction
. The enolates that work best in Michael reactions are those
that are flanked by two electron-withdrawing groups:enolates of 
esters,and nitriles. Because these enolates are relatively
weak bases,addition occurs at the of aldehydes and ke-

tones. The enolates also add to the of esters and amides be-

cause of the low reactivity of the carbonyl group. Notice that Michael reactions form

1,5-dicarbonyl compounds
Ñif one carbonyl carbon is given the 1-position,the other
carbonyl carbon is at the 5-position.
a,b-unsaturatedb-carbona,b-unsaturatedb-carbonb-ketob-ketob-diesters,b-diketones,ORCHCHCR
1. NuORCHCHCR
conjugate additiondirect additionOHNuNuRCHCH2CR2. H3Oa,b-unsaturateda,b-unsaturatedBOOCCH2CH3OCH2CH2CH3Br2H3OOOONuNuBra-positiona-carbonOOO
CH2CHCHCH
3CCH2CCH3OCH2CH2CHa   -diketonean   ,  -unsaturated
aldehydeHOOOCH3CCHCCH3OOO
CH3CHCHCCH
3CH3CH2OCCH2COCH2CH3OCH3CHCH2CCH3a   -diesteran   ,  -unsaturated
ketoneCH3CH2OOCH(COCH2CH3)2804CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIMichael reactions form 1,5-dicarbonyl
compounds.Arthur Michael (1853Ð1942)wasborn in Buffalo,New York. He studied

at the University of Heidelberg,the

University of Berlin,and LÕ…cole de

M”dicine in Paris. He was a

professor of chemistry at Tufts and

Harvard Universities,retiring 

from Harvard when he was 83.
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 804
Section 19.10Alkylation of the -Carbon: The Michael Reaction
805bAll these reactions take place by the same mechanism:A base removes a proton from
the of the carbon acid,the enolate adds to the of an 

carbonyl compound,and the obtains a proton from the solvent.
Notice that if either of the reactants in a Michael reaction has an ester group,the
base used to remove the is the same as the leaving group of the ester. This is

done because the base,in addition to being able to remove an can react as a

nucleophile and attack the carbonyl group of the ester. If the nucleophile is identical to

the OR group of the ester,nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group will not change

the reactant.Enamines can be used in place of enolates in Michael reactions. When an enamine
is used as a nucleophile in a Michael reaction,the reaction is called a 
Stork enaminereaction
.CH3OCH3CH3OCOCH3OCH3OCH3COa-proton,a-protona-carbona,b-unsaturatedb-carbona-carbonOOOCH3CHCHCNH
2CH3CH2CCH2COCH3OCH3CHCH2CNH2a   -keto esteran   ,  -unsaturated
amideCH3OOOCH3CH2CCHCOCH3OCH3CH2CHCHCOCH
3OCH3CCH2CNa   -keto nitrilean   ,  -unsaturated
esterCH3OOCH3CH2CHCH2COCH3OCH3CCHCN
Gilbert Storkwas born in Belgiumin 1921. He graduated from the

University of Florida and received a

Ph.D. from the University of

Wisconsin. He was a professor of

chemistry at Harvard University and

has been a professor at Columbia

University since 1953. He is

responsible for the development of

many new synthetic procedures in

addition to the one bearing his name.
addition of theenolate to the
-carbonremoval of a proton from 
the -carbonprotonation ofthe -carbonORCCH2CRRCCHCR
OORCHRCCHCROCHCR
OHOHORCHRCCHCROCH2CRHO
OOOHORCHCHCR
Omechanism of the Michael reaction
NHHCH2HCl, H2OCHCH
OCH2CHHHOCHNNCH2CH2CHHO
NOOOCH2CH2CHOmechanism of the Stork enamine reaction
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 805
806CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIPROBLEM 16What reagents would you use to prepare the following compounds?
19.11The Aldol AdditionIn Chapter18,we saw that aldehydes and ketones are electrophiles and therefore react
with nucleophiles. In the preceding sections of this chapter,we have seen that when a

proton is removed from the of an aldehyde or a ketone,the resulting anion is

a nucleophile and therefore reacts with electrophiles. An 
aldol additionis a reaction inwhich bothof these activities are observed:One molecule of a carbonyl compound
Ñafter a proton is removed from an 
Ñreacts as a nucleophileand attacks theelectrophilic
carbonyl carbon of a second molecule of the carbonyl compound.
Analdol addition is a reaction between two molecules of an 
aldehydeor two mole-
cules of a ketone
. When the reactant is an aldehyde,the addition product is a
which is why the reaction is called an aldol addition (ÒaldÓforaldehyde,ÒolÓfor alcohol). When the reactant is a ketone,the addition product is a
Because the addition reaction is reversible,good yields of the addi-
tion product are obtained only if it is removed from the solution as it is formed.
In the first step of an aldol addition,a base removes an from the carbonyl
compound,creating an enolate. The enolate adds to the carbonyl carbon of a second

molecule of the carbonyl compound,and the resulting negatively charged oxygen is

protonated by the solvent.
a-protonOOHO
HOa   -hydroxyaldehydealdol additions2 CH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CHCH3CHCHOOHO
HOa   -hydroxyketone2 CH3CCH3CH3CCH3CH2CCH3b-hydroxyketone.b-hydroxyaldehyde,RCHCROa nucleophilean electrophile
RCH2CROa-carbona-carbonOOCH3CCH2CH2CH(COCH2CH3)2b.a.OOCCH3CH3COCH3-D Molecules:-Hydroxyaldehyde; 
-HydroxyketonebbThe new bond formed in an aldol
addition is between the of one

molecule and the carbon that formerly
was the carbonyl carbon of the other
molecule.A-carbonCCOOO
OHOCH3CH2CHOa   -hydroxyaldehyde CH3CH2CHCH
3CHCHCH3CH3CH2CHCHCH
OHO
CH3CH3CH2CHCHCH
HOH2Omechanism for the aldol additionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 806
Section 19.12Dehydration of Aldol Addition Products: Formation of -Unsaturated Aldehydes and Ketones
807a,bKetones are less susceptible than aldehydes to attack by nucleophiles (Section18.2),
so aldol additions occur more slowly with ketones. The relatively high reactivity of

aldehydes in competing aldol addition reactions is what causes them to give low yields

of products (Section19.8).
Because an aldol addition reaction occurs between two molecules of the same
carbonyl compound,the product has twice as many carbons as the reacting aldehyde

or ketone.
PROBLEM 17Show the aldol addition product that would be formed from each of the following compounds:
PROBLEM 18For each of the following compounds,indicate the aldehyde or ketone from which it would
be formed by an aldol addition:a.2-ethyl-3-hydroxyhexanalc.2,4-dicyclohexyl-3-hydroxybutanal
b.4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-pentanoned.5-ethyl-5-hydroxy-4-methyl-3-heptanone
PROBLEM 19An aldol addition can be catalyzed by acids as well as by bases. Propose a mechanism for
the acid-catalyzed aldol addition of propanal.19.12Dehydration of Aldol Addition Products:
Formation of -Unsaturated

Aldehydes and KetonesYou have seen that alcohols are dehydrated when they are heated with acid (Sec-
tion12.5). The and products of aldol addition

reactions are easier to dehydrate than many other alcohols because the double bond

formed as the result of dehydration is conjugated with a carbonyl group. Conjugation

increases the stability of the product (Section8.3) and,therefore,makes it easier to

form. If the product of an aldol addition is dehydrated,the overall reaction is called an

aldol condensation
. A condensation reaction
is a reaction that combines two mole-
cules while removing a small molecule (usually water or an alcohol).
OOHO
HO2 CH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CHCHCH
a  -hydroxyaldehydean    ,  -unsaturated aldehyde
H3OCH3OCH3CH2CHCCHH
2OCH3b-hydroxyketoneb-hydroxyaldehydeA,Bd.Ob.CH
3CHCH2CH2CHCH3Oc.CH
3CH2CCH2CH3OCH3CH2CH2CH2CHa.Oa-alkylationa   -hydroxyketoneOOO
OHOCH3CCH3O CH3CCH3CH2CCH3CH3CH3CCH
2CCH3OHOCH3CH3CCH
2CCH3HOH2O3-D Molecule:2-Methyl-2-pentenal 
(an -unsaturated aldehyde)
a,bAn aldol addition product loses water to
form an aldol condensation product.
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 807
and can also be dehydrated under basic
conditions,so heating the aldol addition product in either acid or base leads to dehy-

dration. The product of dehydration is called an enone
ÑÒeneÓfor the double bond andÒoneÓfor the carbonyl group.
Dehydration sometimes occurs under the conditions in which the aldol addition is
carried out,without additional heating. In such cases,the com-

pound is an intermediate and the enone is the final product of the reaction. For exam-

ple,the formed from the aldol addition of acetophenone loses water

as soon as it is formed,because the double bond formed by loss of water is conjugated

not only with the carbonyl group,but also with the benzene ring. Conjugation stabi-

lizes the dehydrated product and therefore makes it relatively easy to form.
PROBLEM 20SOLVED
How could you prepare the following compounds using a starting material containing no
more than three carbon atoms?a.b.c.
SOLUTION TO 20a
A compound with the correct four-carbon skeleton can be obtained
if a two-carbon aldehyde undergoes an aldol addition. Dehydration of the addition product

forms an aldehyde. Catalytic hydrogenation forms an aldehyde. Some of

the aldehyde might be reduced to an alcohol,but that
Õs all right becauseboth the aldehyde and the alcohol can be oxidized by an acidic solution of CrO
3to the tar-get compound (Section 20.2).19.13The Mixed Aldol AdditionIf two different carbonyl compounds are used in an aldol addition,four products can
be formed because each enolate can react both with another molecule of the carbonyl

compound from which the enolate was formed and with the other carbonyl compound.

In the following example,both carbonyl compound A and carbonyl compound B can
H2PtOCH3CHHOmajorminor
OOHCH3CHCH2CHOCH3CHOCH3CH2CH2COHCrO3H2SO4OCH3CH2CH2CHCH
3CH2CH2CH2OHCHCHH3Oor HOa,b-unsaturateda,b-unsaturatedCH3CH2CH2CCH3OCH3CH2CHCHCH     O
CH3BrCH3CH2CH2COHOb-hydroxyketoneb-hydroxycarbonylOOHO
HO2 CH3CCH3CH3CCH
2CCH3-hydroxyketonea-unsaturated ketone
an enone          an,
HOCH3OCH3CCHCCH
3H2OCH3b-hydroxyketonesb-Hydroxyaldehydes808CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIOC2CH
3OHOCCCH2CH3CH3H2OOCCCHHOBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 808
Section 19.13The Mixed Aldol Addition
809lose a proton from an to form enolates and can react with either
A or B,and can react with either A or B:
The preceding reaction is called a mixed aldol additionor a crossed aldol addition
.The four products have similar physical properties,making them difficult to separate.

Consequently,a mixed aldol addition that forms four products is not a synthetically

useful reaction.Under certain conditions,a mixed aldol addition can lead primarily to one product. If
one of the carbonyl compounds does not have any it cannot form an eno-

late. This reduces the number of possible products from four to two. A greater amount

of one of the two products will be formed if the compound 
withoutis al-ways present in excess,because the enolate will be more likely to react with it,rather

than with another molecule of the carbonyl compound from which the enolate was

formed,if there is more of the compound without in solution. Therefore,

the compound with should be added slowly to a basic solution of the com-

pound without If both carbonyl compounds have primarily one aldol product can be
obtained if LDA is used to remove the that creates the enolate. Because

LDA is a strong base (Section19.7),all the carbonyl compound will be converted into

an enolate,so there will be no carbonyl compound left with which the enolate could

react in an aldol addition. An aldol addition will not be able to occur until the second

carbonyl compound is added to the reaction mixture. If the second carbonyl compound

is added slowly,the chance that it will form an enolate and then react with another

molecule of its parent carbonyl compound will be minimized.
LDA1. CH3CH2CH2CH     add slowlyO2. H2OOOOOHCHCH2CH2CH3a-hydrogena-hydrogens,a-hydrogens.a-hydrogensa-hydrogensa-hydrogensa-hydrogens,BAB;Aa-carbonH2OH2OCH3CH3CH3ABABBABAHOHOH2OHOH2OHOH2OHOH2OHOOOCH3CH2CHCH
3CHCH2CHOCH3CHCHOOCH3CHCH2CHCH3CHCHCH3OHOCH3CHCH2CHCH3CHCHCH3OHOCH3CHCH2CHCHCH3CH3CHCHOOCH3CH2CHCH3CHCHOHOCH3CH2CHCH3CHCHCH3OOCH3CHCH2CHCHCH3CH3CHCHOOCH3CH2CHCHCH3CH3CHCHOHOCH3CH2CHCHCH3CH3CHCHOCH3CHCHCHOOCHHOexcessadd slowly
CH3CH2CH2CHOHOCHCHCHCH2CH3OCHCCHH
2OCH2CH3Tutorial:
Aldol reactionsÑsynthesisBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 809
810CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIILudwig Claisen (1851
Ð1930)wasborn in Germany and received a

Ph.D. from the University of Bonn,

studying under Kekul”. He was a

professor of chemistry at the

University of Bonn,Owens College

(Manchester,England),the

University of Munich,the University

of Aachen,the University of Kiel,

and the University of Berlin.
PROBLEM 21Give the products obtained from mixed aldol additions of the following compounds:
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 22Describe how the following compounds could be prepared using an aldol addition in the
first step of the synthesis:
a.c.
b.PROBLEM 23Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
19.14The Claisen CondensationWhen two molecules of an 
esterundergo a condensation reaction,the reaction is called
a Claisen condensation. The product of a Claisen condensation is a ester.
Asin an aldol addition,in a Claisen condensation one molecule of carbonyl
compound is converted into an enolate when an is removed by a strong

base. The enolate attacks the carbonyl carbon of a second molecule of ester. The

base employed corresponds to the leaving group of the ester so that the reactant 

is not changed if the base acts as a nucleophile and attacks the carbonyl group

(Section19.10).
a-hydrogenO 2 CH3CH2COCH2CH3CH3CH2OH  CH3CH2C    CHCOCH2CH3OO1. CH3CH2O2. HCla-keto esterCH3b-ketoCHCHCCHOCHOCH3CH2CCHCH2OHOCH3CH3CH2CHOHCHexcessOCH3CCH3OCH3CH2CCH2CH3OCH3CH2CHOOCH3CH2CH2CHOCH3CH2CH2CH2CHO3-D Molecule:-Keto esterbHOEtOHCH2CCH2C6H5C6H5C6H5C6H5CCOOOOBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 810
Section 19.14The Claisen Condensation
811After nucleophilic attack,the Claisen condensation and the aldol addition differ. In
the Claisen condensation,the negatively charged oxygen reforms the carbon
Ðoxygenbond and expels the group. In the aldol addition,the negatively charged oxy-
gen obtains a proton from the solvent.
The difference between the last step of the Claisen condensation and the last step of
the aldol addition arises from the difference between esters and aldehydes or ketones.

With esters,the carbon to which the negatively charged oxygen is bonded is also bond-

ed to a group that can be expelled. With aldehydes or ketones,the carbon to which the

negatively charged oxygen is bonded is not bonded to a group that can be expelled.

Thus,the Claisen condensation is a substitution reaction,whereas the aldol addition is

an addition reaction.Expulsion of the alkoxide ion is reversible because the alkoxide ion can readily re-
form the tetrahedral intermediate by reacting with the ester. The condensation

reaction can be driven to completion,however,if a proton is removed from the 

ester. Removing a proton prevents the reverse reaction from occurring,because the

negatively charged alkoxide ion will not react with the negatively charged ester

anion. It is easy to remove a proton from the ester because its central 

is flanked by two carbonyl groups,making its much more acidic than the
of the ester starting material.a-hydrogensa-hydrogena-carbonb-ketob-ketob-ketob-ketoH2Oformation of a    bondby expulsion of ROClaisen condensation:OOROR
RCH2CCHCOR
OORRCH2CCHCORprotonation of Oaldol additionOORRCH2CHCHCHOOHRRCH2CHCHCHROHOORpOOOOOCH3OCH3CH2COCH3Omechanism for the Claisen condensation CH3CHCOCH3CH3CHCOCH3CH3OCH3HCH3CH2CCHCOCH
3CH3CH3OCHCOCH3CH3CH2CCH3OHOOOCH3ORRCH2CCHCOCH
3CHCOCH3CH3OHOORCH
3ORCH2CCCOCH3OORRCH2C-keto ester-keto ester anionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 811
812CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIConsequently,a successful Claisen condensation requires an ester with two
and an equivalent amount of base rather than a catalytic amount of base.
When the reaction is over,addition of acid to the reaction mixture reprotonates the
ester anion. Any remaining alkoxide ion that could cause the reaction to re-
verse would also be protonated.
PROBLEM 24Give the products of the following reactions:
a.b.
PROBLEM 25Explain why a Claisen condensation product is not obtained from esters such as ethyl
benzoate and ethyl 2-methylbutanoate.
19.15The Mixed Claisen CondensationA mixed Claisen condensationis a condensation reaction between two different es-
ters. Like a mixed aldol addition,a mixed Claisen condensation is a useful reaction

only if it is carried out under conditions that foster the formation of primarily one

product. Otherwise,a mixture of products that are difficult to separate will be formed.

Primarily one product will be formed if one of the esters has no (and

therefore cannot form an enolate) and the other ester is added slowly so that the ester

without is always in excess.
A reaction similar to a mixed Claisen condensation is the condensation of a ketone
and an ester.Because the of a ketone are more acidic than those of an

ester,primarily one product is formed if the ketone and the base are each added slow-

ly to the ester. The product is a Because of the difference in acidities of the
primarily one condensation product is obtained even if both reagents
have 
ethyl acetateexcesscondensation of a ketone and an esterOCH3COCH
2CH3CH3CH2OH1. CH3CH2O2. HClOOOCCH3a-diketone
add slowlya-hydrogens.a-hydrogens,b-diketone.a-hydrogensa-hydrogensa-hydrogens1.  CH3CH2O2.  HClCH3CHCH2COCH2CH3OCH31.  CH3O2.  HClCH3CH2CH2COCH3Ob-ketoa-hydrogens1. CH3CH2O2. HClOOCOCH
2CH3OCOCHCOCH2CH3excessadd slowlyCH3CH2CH2COCH2CH3CH3CH2OHCH2CH3a mixed Claisen condensationCHCOCH
3CH3CH2OHOORRCH2CCCOCH3OORRCH2CHClCH3CH2OBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 812
Section 19.15The Mixed Claisen Condensation
813Tutorial:
Claisen reactionsÑsynthesisA aldehyde is formed when a ketone condenses with a formate ester.
A ester is formed when a ketone condenses with diethyl carbonate.
PROBLEM 26Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.d.PROBLEM 27SOLVED
Show how the following compounds could be prepared,starting with 3-cyanocyclohexanone:
a.b.
SOLUTION TO 27a
Because the desired compound is a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound,it
can be prepared by treating an enolate with an ester.
OCNO1. CH3CH2COCH3OCH3O2. H3OOOCCH2CH3CNCNOOCNCH2CH2CCH3OOCNCCH2CH31.  CH3CH2O2.  HClCH3CH2COCH2CH3OCH3CH2OCOCH2CH3excessO1.  CH3O2.  HClCH3CH2CH2COCH3OHCOCH3excessO1.  CH3CH2O2.  HClCOCH2CH3OexcessOCCH31.  CH3O2.  HClCH3COCH3OCH3CH2COCH3Ob-ketoethyl formateexcessadd slowlyOHCOCH
2CH3CH3CH2OH1. CH3CH2O2. HClOOOCHa-keto aldehyde
b-ketodiethyl carbonateexcessadd slowlya-keto ester
OCH3CH2OCOCH
2CH3CH3CH2OH1. CH3CH2O2. HClOOOCOCH2CH3BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 813
SOLUTION TO 27b
Because the desired compound is a 1,5-dicarbonyl compound,it
can be prepared by a Michael reactionÑtreating an enolate with an 
carbonyl compound.
19.16Intramolecular Condensationand Addition ReactionsWe have seen that if a compound has two functional groups that can react with each
other,an intramolecular reaction readily occurs if the reaction leads to the formation

of five-or six-membered rings (Section11.11). Consequently,if base is added to a

compound that contains two carbonyl groups,an intramolecular reaction occurs if a

product with a five-or six-membered ring can be formed. Thus,a compound with two

ester groups undergoes an intramolecular Claisen condensation,and a compound with

two aldehyde or ketone groups undergoes an intramolecular aldol addition.
Intramolecular Claisen CondensationsThe addition of base to a 1,6-diester causes the diester to undergo an intramolecular

Claisen condensation,thereby forming a five-membered ring ester. An in-

tramolecular Claisen condensation is called a Dieckmann condensation.A six-membered ring ester is formed from a Dieckmann condensation of a
1,7-diester.
The mechanism of the Dieckmann condensation is the same as the mechanism of
the Claisen condensation. The only difference between the two reactions is that the at-

tacking enolate and the carbonyl group undergoing nucleophilic attack are in different

molecules in the Claisen condensation,but are in the same molecule in the Dieckmann

condensation. The Dieckmann condensation,like the Claisen condensation,is driven
a-keto ester1. CH3O2. HClCH2CH3OHOOOCH2CH2COCH3a 1,7-diesterCH2OCH2COCH3COCH3b-ketoa-keto ester1. CH3O2. HCla 1,6-diesterCH2CH3OHOOOOCH2CH2CH2COCH3COCH3COCH3b-ketoa,b-unsaturated814CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIOOCH2CHCCH3CH3OHOCH3OOOCH2CH2CCH3CNCN
CNWalter Dieckmann (1869
Ð1925)was born in Germany. He received a

Ph.D. from the University of Munich

and became a professor of chemistry

there.
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 814
Section 19.16Intramolecular Condensation and Addition Reactions
815to completion by carrying out the reaction with enough base to remove a proton from
the of the ester product. When the reaction is over,acid is added to

reprotonate the condensation product.PROBLEM 28Write the mechanism for the base-catalyzed formation of a cyclic ester from a
1,7-diester.
Intramolecular Aldol AdditionsBecausea 1,4-diketone has two different sets of two different intramol-
ecular addition products can potentially formÑone with a five-membered ring,the
other with a three-membered ring. The greater stability of five-and six-membered

rings causes them to be formed preferentially (Section2.11). In fact,the five-

membered ring product is the only product formed from the intramolecular aldol ad-

dition of a 1,4-diketone.
The intramolecular aldol addition of a 1,6-diketone potentially can lead to either a
seven-or a five-membered ring product. Again,the more stable product
Ñthe one withthe five-membered ring
Ñis the only product of the reaction.1,5-Diketones and 1,7-diketones undergo intramolecular aldol additions to form
six-membered ring products.a-hydrogens,b-ketob-ketoa-carbonCH2CH2COCH3CH2COCH3CH2OOOOOCH3Omechanism for the Dieckmann condensationCH2CHCOCH3CH2COCH3CH2OOCH
3OHCH3OCOCH3COCH3OOCH3CH3CCH2CH2CCH2C    CH
3OOCH3CCH2CH2CCH32,5-hexanedionea 1,4-diketoneOOOH2OH2OCH3H2OOOCH3OHOHOHOCH3CCH2CHCCH3OOCH3H2OOC    CH
3OCH3HOnot formedCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CCH32,7-octanedionea 1,6-diketoneOOH2OH2OHOHOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CHCCH3OOCH3H2OOCCH3OCH3CCH3OCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CCH2OOHOH2OOCH3OOCH3OHnot formedBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 815
PROBLEM 29If the preference for formation of a six-membered ring were not so great,what other cyclic
product would be formed from the intramolecular aldol addition of
a.2,6-heptanedione?b.2,8-nonanedione?
PROBLEM 30Can 2,4-pentanedione undergo an intramolecular aldol addition? If so,why? If not,why not?
PROBLEM 31SOLVED
What products can be obtained if the following keto aldehyde is treated with a base?
Which would you expect to be the major product?
SOLUTIONThree products are possible because there are three different sets of
More B and C are formed than A because a five-membered ring is formed in
preference to a seven-membered ring. The major product depends on the reaction condi-

tions. B is the thermodynamic product because it is formed from the more stable enolate. C
is the kinetic product because the of the aldehyde is more acidic than the
of the ketone (Table 19.1).
ABC
HOOOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CHOOCH3CCHCH2CH2CH2CHOOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CHCHOOCH2CCH2CH2CH2CH2CHOOCHCH2CH2CH2CHOOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CHOOHOHOOOCCH2CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH3CCCH3CHCH3HOOHCH2Oa-hydrogena-hydrogena-hydrogens.OOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CHHOH2OOOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CCH32,8-nonanedionea 1,7-diketoneCCH3OHOH2OOOCH3CCH2CH2CH2CCH32,6-heptanedionea 1,5-diketoneHOCH3OHOCH3816CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  1:52 PM  Page 816PROBLEM 32Give the product of the reaction of each of the following compounds with a base:
a.c.
b.d.
The Robinson AnnulationReactions that form carbonÐcarbon bonds are important to synthetic chemists. Without
such reactions,large organic molecules could not be prepared from smaller ones. We

have seen that Michael reactions and aldol additions form carbon
Ðcarbon bonds. The
Robinson annulationis a reaction that puts these two carbon
Ðcarbon bond-formingreactions together,providing a route to the synthesis of many complicated organic mole-

cules. ÒAnnulationÓcomes from annulus,Latin for 
Òring.ÓThus,an 
annulation reaction
is a ring-forming reaction.The first stage of a Robinson annulation is a Michael reaction that forms a 1,5-dike-
tone. You just saw that a 1,5-diketone undergoes an intramolecular aldol addition

when treated with baseÑthis is the second stage of the Robinson annulation. Notice
that a Robinson annulation results in a product that has a 2-cyclohexenone ring.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Propose a synthesis for each of the following compounds,using a Robinson annulation:
By analyzing a Robinsonannulation,we will be able to determine which part of the mole-
cule comes from which reactant. This,then,will allow us to choose appropriate reactants

for any other Robinson annulation. Analysis shows that the keto group of the cyclo-

hexenone comes from the carbonyl compound and the double bond

results from attack of the enolate of the carbonyl compound on the

carbonyl group of the other reactant. Thus,we can arrive at the appropriate reactants by

cutting through the double bond and cutting between the and on the other

side of the carbonyl group.
g-carbonsb-a,b-unsaturateda,b-unsaturatedOCH3b.a.OCH3OCH2CH2CH2CCH3OOOOOHCCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CHOCH2CH2CCH3OSection 19.16Intramolecular Condensation and Addition Reactions
817Sir Robert Robinson (1886Ð1975)was born in England,the son of a

manufacturer. After receiving a Ph.D.

from the University of Manchester,he

joined the faculty at the University of

Sydney in Australia. He returned to

England three years later,becoming

a professor of chemistry at Oxford in

1929. Robinson was an accomplished
mountain climber. Knighted in 1939,

he received the 1947 Nobel Prize in

chemistry for his work on alkaloids.
Tutorial:
Robinson annulationÑsynthesisCH3HOHOOOOOOOCH2CHCCH3OHCa Michaelreactionthe Robinson annulationan intramolecular
aldol additionH2OBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:20 PM  Page 817
Therefore,the required reactants for (a) are:
By cutting through (b),we can determine the required reactants for its synthesis:
Therefore,the required reactants for (b) are:
Now continue on to Problem 33.
PROBLEM 33Propose a synthesis for each of the following compounds,using a Robinson annulation:
19.17Decarboxylation of 3-Oxocarboxylic AcidsCarboxylate ions do not lose ,for the same reason that alkanes such as ethane do
not lose a proton
Ñbecause the leaving group would be a carbanion. Carbanions are
very strong bases and therefore are very poor leaving groups.
CO2OCH3OH3Cd.b.OCH3c.H3CC6H5OCH3Oa.CH2CH3HOOCH2CHCCH3OCH3CCH3CH3OCH3CH3OOOCH3OHOOCH2CHCCH3CH3CH2CHO  ,  -unsaturated
carbonyl compoundCH3CH3CHOCH3OO818CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 818
Section 19.17Decarboxylation of 3-Oxocarboxylic Acids
819If,however,the group is bonded to a carbon that is adjacent to a carbonyl
carbon,the group can be removed because the electrons left behind can be delo-

calized onto the carbonyl oxygen. Consequently,3-oxocarboxylate ions (carboxylate

ions with a keto group at the 3-position) lose when they are heated. Loss of 

from a molecule is called decarboxylation.Notice the similarity between removal of from a 3-oxocarboxylate ion and
removal of a proton from an In both reactions,a substituent
Ñin one
case,in the other
Ñis removed from an and its bonding electrons are
delocalized onto an oxygen.Decarboxylation is even easier if the reaction is carried out under acidic conditions,
because the reaction is catalyzed by an intramolecular transfer of a proton from the

carboxyl group to the carbonyl oxygen. The enol that is formed immediately tau-

tomerizes to a ketone.
We saw in Section19.1that it is harder to remove a proton from an if
the electrons are delocalized onto the carbonyl group of an ester rather than onto the

carbonyl group of a ketone. For the same reason,a higher temperature is required to

decarboxylate a acid such as malonic acid than to decarboxylate a
acid.malonic acidCOHOCH
3COHHOCH
2CCCH2HOtautomerization135 COOOCO2Hb-ketob-dicarboxylica-carbonCOCH3CH3COHCH3CH2CCCH2CH3tautomerization3-oxobutanoic acidacetoacetic acida   -keto acidOHOOCO2COCH3CH2ÐCOCH3CH2CCH2CH3Hremoving a proton from an   -carbon
HpropanoneacetoneOa-carbonHCO2a-carbon.CO2COCH3CH2ÐCOCH3CH2CCCH2CH3removing CO2 from an   -carbon
3-oxobutanoate ionacetoacetate ionOOOCO2CO2CO2CO2CO2OHCH3CH2CCH3CH2O3-Oxocarboxylic acids decarboxylatewhen heated.BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 819
820CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIOCH3CH2CH2CH2COHCO2AgBr1. Ag2O2. Br2, CH3CH2CH2CH2Brpentanoic acid1-bromobutane
THE HUNSDIECKER REACTIONHeinz and Clare Hunsdiecker found that a car-
boxylic acid can be decarboxylated if a heavy
metal salt of the carboxylic acid is heated with bromine or io-
dine. The product is an alkyl halide with one less carbon atom
than the starting carboxylic acid. The heavy metal can be silver
ion,mercuric ion,or lead(IV). The reaction is now known as

the Hunsdiecker reaction
.The reaction involves formation of a hypobromite as a result of
precipitation of AgBr. A radical reaction is initiated by ho-

molytic cleavage of the bond of the hypobromite. The

carboxyl radical loses and the alkyl radical thus formed

abstracts a bromine radical from the hypobromite to propagate

the reaction.a hypobromiteORCOAgAgBrBr2BrORCOCO2,OBrORCOORCOORCOBrBrOCOR
CO2ROBrRBr
RCOR
initiation steppropagation steppropagation stepIn summary,carboxylic acids with a carbonyl group at the 3-position (both
acids and acids) lose when they are heated.
OOCH3CH2CH2CCH2COHCO2CO2OCH3CH2CH2CCH3OOCH3HOCCHCOHCO2OCH3CH2COHOCOOHO3-oxohexanoic acid2-oxocyclohexane-carboxylic acid2-pentanone-methylmalonic acidpropionic acidcyclohexanoneCO2b-dicarboxylicb-ketocarboxylicPROBLEM 34Which of the following compounds would be expected to decarboxylate when heated?
a.c.
b.d.
HOOOOOOOHOHOOOOHHeinz (1904Ð1981) andClare
(1903Ð1995) Hunsdiecker
were both
born in Germany,Heinz in Cologne

and Clare in Kiel. They both received

Ph.D.s from the University of

Cologne and spent their careers

working in a private laboratory in

Cologne.
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 820
Section 19.18The Malonic Ester Synthesis: Synthesis of Carboxylic Acids
821A malonic ester synthesis forms a carboyxlic acid with two more 

carbon atoms than the alkyl halide.19.18The Malonic Ester Synthesis:Synthesis of Carboxylic AcidsA combination of two of the reactions discussed in this chapter
Ñalkylation of an
and decarboxylation of a acid
Ñcan be used to prepare car-
boxylic acids of any desired chain length. The procedure is called the 
malonic estersynthesisbecause the starting material for the synthesis is the diethyl ester of mal-
onic acid. The first two carbons of the carboxylic acid come from malonic ester,and

the rest of the carboxylic acid comes from the alkyl halide used in the second step of

the reaction.In thefirst part of the malonic ester synthesis,the of the diester is alkylat-
ed (Section19.8). A proton is easily removed from the because it is flanked

by two ester groups The resulting reacts with an alkyl

halide,forming an malonic ester. Because alkylation is an reaction,

it works best with methyl halides and primary alkyl halides (Section10.2). Heating the
malonic ester in an acidic aqueous solution hydrolyzes it to anmalonic acid,which,upon further heating,loses forming a car-
boxylic acid with two more carbons than the alkyl halide.
PROBLEM 35What alkyl bromide(s) should be used in the malonic ester synthesis of each of the
following carboxylic acids?
a.propanoic acidc.3-phenylpentanoic acid
b.2-methylpropanoic acidd.4-methylpentanoic acid
CO2,a-substituteda-substitutedSN2a-substituteda-carbanionpa13.a-carbona-carbonOC2H5OCCH
2COC2H51. CH3CH2O2. RBr3. HCl, H2O, ORCH
2COHOdiethyl malonatemalonic esterfrom malonic esterfrom the alkyl halidemalonic ester synthesisb-dicarboxylica-carbonTutorial:
Malonic ester synthesishydrolysisremoval of a protonfrom the -carbonakylation of the -carbondecarboxylationOOC2H5OCCH
2COC2H5OOC2H5OCCHCOC
2H5OOC2H5OCCH
RCOC2H5Br CH3CH2Oan   -substituted malonic ester
an   -substituted malonic acid
HCl, H2ORBr
OOHOCCO2CHRCOHORCH
2COH2 CH3CH2OHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 821
822CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIICarboxylic acids with two substituents bonded to the can be prepared by
carrying out two successive alkylations.
PROBLEM 36Explain why the following carboxylic acids cannot be prepared by the malonic ester

synthesis:19.19The Acetoacetic Ester Synthesis:Synthesis of Methyl KetonesThe only difference between the acetoacetic ester synthesis and the malonic ester
synthesis is the use of acetoacetic ester rather than malonic ester as the starting material.
The difference in starting material causes the product of the 
acetoacetic ester synthesisto be a 
methyl ketone
rather than a carboxylic acid.The carbonyl group of the methyl
ketone and the carbon atoms on either side of it come from acetoacetic ester,and the rest

of the ketone comes from the alkyl halide used in the second step of the reaction.
ethyl 3-oxobutanoateethyl acetoacetate"acetoacetic ester"acetoacetic ester synthesisOOCOC2H5ORCH
2CCH3CH3CCH
21. CH3CH2O2. RBr3. HCl, H2O, from the alkyl halidefrom acetoacetic esterb.CHCH
COHCHOc.CH
CCHCOHOCHCHCHCOHa.Oa-carbona-carbonOOC2H5OCCH
2COC2H5OOC2H5OCCHCOC
2H5OOC2H5OCCH
RCOC2H5Br2 CH3CH2OH  CH3CH2OCH3CH2ORBr
OOC2H5OCCO2CRCOC2H5ORCHCOH
HCl, H2ORBrOOC2H5OCC
RRCOC2H5RROOHOCCCOH
RBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 822
Section 19.19The Acetoacetic Ester Synthesis: Synthesis of Methyl Ketones
823Tutorial:
Acetoacetic ester synthesisThemechanisms for the acetoacetic ester synthesis and the malonic ester synthesis
are similar. The last step in the acetoacetic ester synthesis is the decarboxylation of a

substituted acetoacetic acid rather than a substituted malonic acid.PROBLEM 37SOLVED
Starting with methyl propanoate,how could you prepare 4-methyl-3-heptanone?
Because the target molecule has several more carbon atoms than the starting material,a
Claisen condensation appears to be a good way to start this synthesis. The Claisen conden-

sation forms a ester that can be alkylated at the desired carbon because it is flanked

by two carbonyl groups. Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis will form a 3-oxocarboxylic acid that

will decarboxylate when heated.PROBLEM 38What alkyl bromide should be used in the acetoacetic ester synthesis of each of the fol-

lowing methyl ketones?
a.2-pentanonec.4-phenyl-2-butanone
b.2-octanone
b-ketomethyl propanoate4-methyl-3-heptanoneOCH3CH3COCH3OCH3CH3CCHCH2CH2CH3?CH3hydrolysisremoval of a protonfrom the -carbonalkylation ofthe -carbondecarboxylationHCl, H2OOOCOC2H5CH3CCH
2OOCOC2H5CH3CCH
OOCOC2H5CH3CCH
ROOCOHCH3CCH
ORCH3CCH
2RCH3CH2ORBr
BrCO2CH3CH2OH1. CH3O2. H3O 1. CH3O2. CH3CH2CH2Br HCl, H2OCH3CH3CH2CH2CH3CH3OCH3CH3COCH3OOCH3CH3CCHCOCH
3OCH3CH3CCHCH2CH2CH3OOCH3CH3CCCOCH
3BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 823
824CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III19.20Designing a Synthesis VI: Making New CarbonÐCarbon BondsWhen you are planning the synthesis of a compound that requires the formation of a
new carbon
Ðcarbon bond,first locate the new bond that must be made. For example,in
the synthesis of the following the new bond is the one that makes the

second five-membered ring:
Next,determine which of the atoms that form the bond should be the nucleophile
and which should be the electrophile. In this case,it is easy to choose between the two

possibilities because you know that a carbonyl carbon is an electrophile.
Nowyou need to determine what compound you could use that would give you the
desired electrophilic and nucleophilic sites. If the starting material is indicated,use it

as a clue to arrive at the desired compound. For example,an ester carbonyl group

would be a good electrophile for this synthesis because it has a group that would be

eliminated. Furthermore,the of the ketone are more acidic than the
of the ester,so it would be easy to obtain the desired nucleophile. The
ester can be easily prepared from the carboxylic acid starting material.In the next synthesis,two new carbon
Ðcarbon bonds must be formed.After determining the electrophilic and nucleophilic sites,you can see that two suc-
cessive alkylations of a diester of malonic acid,using 1,5-dibromopentane for the

alkyl halide,will produce the desired compound.
CH3OOCH
3OOCH3OOCH
3OO?a-hydrogensa-hydrogensCH3CH3CH3CH3orOOOOnucleophileelectrophileelectrophilenucleophileOOOOCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CH2COHnew bond?b-diketone,Tutorial:
RetrosynthesisCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH31. SOCl21. CH3O2. H3O2. CH3OHOOOOOCH2CH2COCH3OCH2CH2COHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 824
Section 19.20Designing a Synthesis VI: Making New Carbon
ÐCarbon Bonds825In planning the following synthesis,the diester that is given as the starting mate-
rial suggests that you should use a Dieckmann condensation to obtain the cyclic

compound:After the cyclopentanone ring is formed from a Dieckmann condensation of the
starting material,alkylation of the followed by hydrolysis of the ester

and decarboxylation forms the desired product.PROBLEM 39Design a synthesis for each of the following compounds:
a.b.c.d.CHOCCHCOCHOOOCOHCHOCHCHCOH
OOCHOCCHCHCOCHOOCHCHCCHOCCHCHCHOb-ketoa-carbonCH3OOCH
3OOCH3OOCH
31. CH3OCH3O2. BrBr
OOOOBrCH3OOCH
3OOCH3OOCH
3nucleophileelectrophileOOOC2H5OCCH2CH2CH2CH2COC2H5CH3CH2OOC2H5OCnucleophileelectrophilenew bond?C1. C2H5O2. HHCl, H2O1. C2H5O2. CH3CH2BrOOC2H5OC2H5OCOOCH3CH2CO2C2H5OCOOC2H5OHOC2H5OCCH3CH2BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 825
826CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III19.21Reactions at the -Carbon
in Biological SystemsMany reactions that occur in biological systems involve reactions at the 
Ñthe kinds of reactions you have studied in this chapter. We will now look at a few

examples.
A Biological Aldol AdditionD-Glucose,the most abundant sugar found in nature,is synthesized by biological systems
from two molecules of pyruvate. The series of reactions that convert two molecules of

pyruvate into 
D-glucose is called gluconeogenesis. The reverse process
Ñthe breakdown
of D-glucose into two molecules of pyruvate
Ñis called glycolysis(Section25.1).
BecauseD-glucose has twice as many carbons as pyruvate,it should not be surprising
that one of the steps in the biosynthesis of 
D-glucose is an aldol addition. An enzyme
called aldolase catalyzes an aldol addition between dihydroxyacetone phosphate and
D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The product is 
D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate,which is sub-
sequently converted to 
D-glucose. The mechanism of this reaction is discussed in
Section24.9.
PROBLEM 40Propose a mechanism for the formation of 
D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate from dihydroxyace-
tone phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate,using as the catalyst.
A Biological Aldol CondensationCollagen is the most abundant protein in mammals,amounting to about one-fourth of
the total protein. It is the major fibrous component of bone,teeth,skin,cartilage,and

tendons. It also is responsible for holding groups of cells together in discrete units. In-

dividual collagen molecules
Ñcalled tropocollagenÑcan be isolated only from tissues
of young animals. As animals age,the individual molecules become cross-linked,

which is why meat from older animals is tougher than meat from younger ones. Colla-

gen cross-linking is an example of an aldol condensation.
HOaldolaseCH2OPO32COHOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OPO32COCH2OHCH2OPO32CHCH2OPO32OOHHD-fructose-1,6-diphosphatedihydroxyacetone phosphateD-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphateOO2 CH3CCO
CH2OHHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
HCO
several stepsD-glucosepyruvategluconeogenesisglycolysisa-carbonA3-D Molecule:AldolaseBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 826
Section 19.21Reactions at the -Carbon in Biological Systems
827aBefore collagen molecules can cross-link,the primary amino groups of the lysine
residues of collagen must be converted to aldehyde groups. The enzyme that catalyzes

this reaction is called lysyl oxidase. An aldol condensation between two aldehyde

residues results in a cross-linked protein.
A Biological Claisen CondensationFatty acids are long-chain,unbranched carboxylic acids (Sections17.13 and 26.1). Most

naturally occurring fatty acids contain an even number of carbons because they are syn-

thesized from acetate,which has two carbon atoms.
In Section17.20,you saw that carboxylic acids can be activated in biological systems
by being converted to thioesters of coenzyme A.
One of the necessary reactants for fatty acid synthesis is malonyl-CoA,which is
obtained by carboxylation of acetyl-CoA. The mechanism for this reaction is discussed

in Section25.5.
Before fatty acid synthesis can occur,however,the acyl groups of acetyl-CoA and
malonyl-CoA are transferred to other thiols by means of a transesterification reaction.
OCH3CRSH
SCoASCoAOCH3CCoASH
SRRSHCoASHOOOCH
2CCSROOOCH
2CCOCH3CHCO
3SCoAOOOCH
2CSCoACacetyl-CoAmalonyl-CoA
lysyloxidaseH3NCH2CH2(CH2)2CHNHCOCH(CH2)2CH2CH2NH3NHCOaldolcondensationHCCH2(CH2)2CHNHCOCH(CH2)2CH2CHNHCOOOC(CH2)2CHNHCOHCO
CH(CH2)2CH2CHNHCOlysineresiduescross-linked collagenOCH3CCoASH
ATPOOCH3COOOOOPOOPSCoAAMP
acetatecoenzyme Aacetyl-CoA
pyrophosphateBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 827
828CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIThe first step in the biosynthesis of a fatty acid is a Claisen condensation between a
molecule of acetyl thioester and a molecule of malonyl thioester. You have seen that,in

the laboratory the nucleophile needed for a Claisen condensation is obtained by using

a strong base to remove an Strong bases are not available for biological

reactions because they take place at neutral pH. So the required nucleophile is gener-

ated by removing 
Ñrather than a protonÑfrom the of malonyl thioester.
(Recall that 3-oxocarboxylic acids are easily decarboxylated; Section19.17.) Loss of
also serves to drive the condensation reaction to completion. The product of the
condensation reaction undergoes a reduction,a dehydration,and a second reduction to

give a four-carbon thioester.
The four-carbon thioester undergoes a Claisen condensation with another molecule
of malonyl thioester. Again,the product of the condensation reaction undergoes a re-

duction,a dehydration,and a second reduction,this time to form a six-carbon

thioester. The sequence of reactions is repeated,and each time two more carbons are

added to the chain. This mechanism explains why naturally occurring fatty acids are

unbranched and generally contain an even number of carbons.
Once a thioester with the appropriate number of carbon atoms is obtained,it undergoes
a transesterification reaction with glycerol in order to form fats,oils,and phospholipids

(Sections26.3and 26.4).
PROBLEM 41Palmitic acid (hexadecanoic acid) is a saturated 16-carbon fatty acid. How many moles of
malonyl-CoA are required for the synthesis of one mole of palmitic acid?
PROBLEM 42a.If the biosynthesis of palmitic acid were carried out with and nondeuterated
malonyl thioester,how many deuteriums would be incorporated into palmitic acid?
b.If the biosynthesis of palmitic acid were carried out with and nondeuter-
ated acetyl thioester,how many deuteriums would be incorporated into palmitic acid?
A Biological DecarboxylationAn example of a decarboxylation that occurs in biological systems is the decarboxylation
of acetoacetate. Acetoacetate decarboxylase,the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction,first

forms an imine with acetoacetate. The imine is protonated under physiological conditions
OOCCD2COSRCD3COSRCO2a-carbonCO2a-hydrogen.dehydrationreductionreductionOCH3CSR
OSRCO
2CH2CCH3CSR
SROOCH2CCOOOCH2CCH3CSR
OOCH2CCH3CHSR
OHOCHCCH3CHSR
CH3CH2CH2CSROSRCH3CH2CH2COSRCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2COCH2CSR
CH3CH2CH2COOSROOCH2CCOClaisencondensation1. reduction2. dehydration
3. reductionBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 828
and therefore readily accepts the pair of electrons left behind when the substrate loses
Decarboxylation forms an enamine. Hydrolysis of the enamine produces the decar-
boxylated product (acetone) and regenerates the enzyme (Section18.6).
PROBLEM 43When the enzymatic decarboxylation of acetoacetate is carried out in the acetone
that is formed contains What does this tell you about the mechanism of the reaction?
18O.H218O,CO2.Summary829Tutorial:
Common terms:
reactions at the -carbon
aSummaryA hydrogen bonded to an of an aldehyde,ketone,
ester,or 
N,N-disubstituted amide is sufficiently acidic to be re-
moved by a strong base because the base that is formed when

the proton is removed is stabilized by delocalization of its neg-

ative change onto an oxygen. A 
carbon acidis a compoundwith a relatively acidic hydrogen bonded to an hybridized

carbon. Aldehydes and ketones are more

acidic than esters and
are even more acidic.
Keto
Ðenol interconversion
can be catalyzed by acids orby bases. Generally,the 
keto tautomer
is more stable.When an takes place under acidic

conditions,an enol reacts with an electrophile; when the

reaction takes place under basic conditions,an enolate ion

reacts with an electrophile. Whether C or O reacts with the

electrophile depends on the electrophile and the reaction

conditions.Aldehydes and ketones react with or Under
acidic conditions,a halogen replaces one of the 

of the carbonyl compound; under basic conditions,halogens

replace all the The 
HVZreaction brominatesthe of a carboxylic acid. When the is

halogenated,the reacts with nucleophiles.
LDA is used to form an enolate in reactions that require
the carbonyl compound to be completely converted to eno-

late before it reacts with an electrophile. If the electrophile is

an alkyl halide,the enolate is alkylated. The less substituted
a-carbona-positiona-carbona-hydrogens.a-hydrogensI2 :Br2, Cl2,A-substitution reactionpa11B-keto esterspa9B-Diketonespa25.pa16Ð20sp3A-carbonis alkylated when the reaction is under kinetic
control; the more substituted is alkylated when the

reaction is under thermodynamic control. Aldehydes and

ketones can be alkylated or acylated via an 
enamineintermediate. Enolates of esters,and nitriles undergo 
Michael reactions
withcarbonyl compounds. Michael reactions
form 1,5-dicarbonyl compounds.
In an 
aldol addition,the enolate of an aldehyde or a ke-
tone reacts with the carbonyl carbon of a second molecule

of aldehyde or ketone,forming a or a
The new bond forms between the
of one molecule and the carbon that formerly was
the carbonyl carbon of the other molecule. The product of

an aldol addition can be dehydrated to give an 
aldol con-
densationproduct. In a 
Claisen condensation,the enolate
of an ester reacts with a second molecule of ester,eliminat-

ing an group to form a ester. A 
Dieckmanncondensationis an intramolecular Claisen condensation.A Robinson annulationis a ring-forming reaction inwhich a Michael reaction and an intramolecular aldol addi-
tion occur sequentially.
Carboxylic acids with a carbonyl group at the 3-position
decarboxylatewhen they are heated. Carboxylic acids can
be prepared by a malonic ester synthesis; the of
the diester is alkylated and the malonic ester

undergoes acid-catalyzed hydrolysis and decarboxylation;
a-substituteda-carbonb-ketoORa-carbonCCb-hydroxyketone.b-hydroxyaldehydea,b-unsaturatedb-ketob-ketob-diesters,b-diketones,a-carbona-carbonOEENH
OCNH2CH3CH2OCOCCH3CH2OCH2Oa protonated imineEENH
OCNH2CH3CH3CCH3CH3ENH
CCO2CH3CH2an enamineH3Oacetoacetate decarboxylaseacetoacetateacetoneBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 829
830CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds IIIthe resulting carboxylic acid has two more carbon atoms
than the alkyl halide. Similarly,methyl ketones can be pre-

pared by an 
acetoacetic ester synthesis; the carbonyl
group and the carbon atoms on either side of it come from
acetoacetic ester,and the rest of the methyl ketone comes

from the alkyl halide.
When planning the synthesis of a compound that re-
quires the formation of a new carbon
Ðcarbon bond,first
locate the new bond that must be made,and then determine

which of the atoms that form the bond should be the

nucleophile and which should be the electrophile.Summary of Reactions1.Halogenation of the of aldehydes and ketones (Section19.4).
2.Halogenation of the of carboxylic acids:the Hell
ÐVolhard
ÐZelinski reaction (Section19.5).
3.The can serve as a nucleophile and react with an electrophile (Section19.6).

4.The can serve as an electrophile and react with a nucleophile (Section19.6).

5.Compounds with halogenated can form carbonyl compounds (Section19.6).
baseORCH2CHCRORCHCHCR
Bra,b-unsaturateda-carbonsHOBrNu
RCHCRORCHCRORCHCRNuH3OBr2a-carbonOHRCHCROERCHCRORCHCRbaseEa-carbon1. PBr3 (or P), Br22. H2OORCH2COHORCHCOHBra-carbonORCH2CHX
2H3OORCHCHHX
XORCH2CRX
2X2    Cl2, Br2, or I2HOexcessRCXXOCR2X
a-carbonBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 830
Summary of Reactions8316.Alkylation of the of carbonyl compounds (Section19.8).
7.Alkylation and acylation of the of aldehydes and ketones by means of an enamine intermediate (Sections19.9and 19.10).
8.Michael reaction:attack of an enolate on an carbonyl compound (Section19.10).
9.Aldol addition of two aldehydes,two ketones,or an aldehyde and a ketone (Sections19.11and 19.13).
10.Aldol condensation:dehydration of the product of an aldol addition (Section19.12).
11.Claisen condensation of two esters (Sections19.14and 19.15).
1. CH3O2. HClO2 RCH2COCH3OORCH2CCHCOCH3CH3OHRORCH2CHCHCHORCH2CHH
2OCCHRRH3O or HOOHO2 RCH2CHORCH2CHCHCHRHOOHOOO
RCHRCCH
2CRORCHCH2CRRCCHCROOCHCRHOa,b-unsaturatedNOOCH2ROCCH2CH3OOCH2CH2CHO1. RCH2Br2. HCl, H2O1. CH3CH2CCl2. HCl, H2OcatalyticHNO1. CH22. HCl, H2OOCHCHHa-carbon1. LDA/THF2. RCH2XORCH2CRRCHCROCH2R1. LDA/THF2. RCH2XORCH2CORRCHCOROCH2R1. LDA/THF2. RCH2XRCH2CNRCHCN
CH2RX  halogena-carbonBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 831
832CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III12.Condensation of a ketone and an ester (Section19.15).
13.Robinson annulation (Section19.16).
14.Decarboxylation of 3-oxocarboxylic acids (Section19.17).
15.Malonic ester synthesis:preparation of carboxylic acids (Section19.18).
16.Acetoacetic ester synthesis:preparation of methyl ketones (Section19.19).
1. CH3CH2O2. RBr3. HCl, H2O, OOOCH3CCH2COC2H5RCH2CCH3CO21. CH3CH2O2. RBr3. HCl, H2O, OOOC2H5OCCH2COC2H5RCH2COHCO
2OOORCCH2COHRCCH3CO2H2Obasea Michaelreactionan intramolecularaldol additionOOOOCH3COOOHCHCCH3CH2OOOOCR1. CH3O2. HClRCOCH3CH3OHOOOOCH1. CH3CH2O2. HClexcessexcessexcessHCOCH2CH3CH3CH2OHOOOOCOCH2CH31. CH3CH2O2. HClCH3CH2OCOCH2CH3CH3CH2OHKey Terms
acetoacetic ester synthesis (p.822)
aldol addition (p.806)

aldol condensation (p.807)

ambident nucleophile (p.794)

annulation reaction (p.817)
(p.788)
carbon acid (p.789)

Claisen condensation (p.810)

condensation reaction (p.807)

crossed aldol addition (p.809)
a-carbondecarboxylation (p.819)
Dieckmann condensation (p.814)
(p.791)
enolization (p.792)

gluconeogenesis (p.826)
b-diketoneBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 832
Problems833glycolysis (p.826)
haloform reaction (p.796)

HellÐVolhard
ÐZelinski (HVZ) reaction(p.796)
Hunsdiecker reaction (p.820)
(p.788)
keto
Ðenol interconversion (p.792)
a-hydrogenketo
Ðenol tautomerization (p.792)
ester (p.791)
Kolbe
ÐSchmitt carboxylation reaction(p.801)
malonic ester synthesis (p.821)

Michael reaction (p.804)

mixed aldol addition (p.809)
b-ketomixed Claisen condensation (p.812)
Robinson annulation (p.817)
reaction (p.793)
Stork enamine reaction (p.805)

tautomers (p.791)
a-substitutionProblems
44.Write a structure for each of the following:
a.ethyl acetoacetate

b.acid

c.a ester

d.the enol tautomer of cyclopentanone

e.the carboxylic acid obtained from the malonic ester synthesis when the alkyl halide is propyl bromide
45.Give the products of the following reactions:
a.diethyl heptanedioate:(1)sodium ethoxide; (2)HCl

b.pentanoic acid,followed by hydrolysis

c.acetate:(1)sodium ethoxide; (2)HCl

d.diethyl 2-ethylhexanedioate:(1)sodium ethoxide; (2)HCl

e.diethyl malonate:(1)sodium ethoxide; (2)isobutyl bromide; (3)HCl,

f.carbonate:(1)sodium ethoxide; (2)HCl

g.
h.
i.cyclopentanone:(1)(2)ethyl bromide; (3)HCl,

j.in THF followed by methyl iodide

k.
l.in 

m.diethyl (1)excess sodium ethoxide; (2)HCl
46.The chemical shifts of nitromethane,dinitromethane,and trinitromethane are at and Match each chemical
shift with the compound. Explain how chemical shift correlates with 
47.a.Explain why a racemic mixture of 2-methyl-1-phenyl-1-butanone is formed when (
R)-2-methyl-1-phenyl-1-butanone is
dissolved in an acidic or basic aqueous solution.
b.Give an example of another ketone that would undergo acid-or base-catalyzed racemization.
48.Identify A
ÐL. (Hint:A shows three singlets in its spectrum with integral ratios and gives a positive iodoform test;
see Section19.4)
1. CH3O2. CH3BrHCl, H2OHO
H3OAC5H8O3BCD
HCl, H2OHOexcessI2excessSOCl2EH1. CH3O2. CH3BrHCl, H2OFG2. HCl
1. CH3OLIJCH3OHK3:2:31H NMRpa.d 7.52.d 4.33,d 6.10,1,2-benzenedicarboxylateethyl acetate:D2OcyclohexanoneNaOD2,7-octanedionesodium hydroxideg-butyrolactoneLDAH2Opyrrolidinecatalytic H;vinyl ketoneexcess sodium hydroxidedibenzyl ketonemethylbromidesodium hydroxide1,3-cyclohexanedioneallylacetophenonediethylH2OacetoneethylPBr3Br2b-ketoa-methylmalonicBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 833
834CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III49.Show how the following compounds could be prepared from cyclohexanone:
50.A carbonyl compound rearranges to a more stable conjugated compound in the presence of either
acid or base.a.Propose a mechanism for the base-catalyzed rearrangement.

b.Propose a mechanism for the acid-catalyzed rearrangement.
51.There are other condensation reactions similar to the aldol and Claisen condensations:
a.The 
Perkin condensation
is the condensation of an aromatic aldehyde and acetic anhydride. Give the product obtained from the
following Perkin condensation:
b.What compound would result if water were added to the product of the Perkin condensation?
c.The 
Knoevenagel condensation
is the condensation of an aldehyde or a ketone that has no and a compound such
as diethyl malonate that has an flanked by two electron-withdrawing groups. Give the product obtained from the

following Knoevenagel condensation:
d.What product would be obtained if the product of the Knoevenagel condensation were heated in an aqueous acidic solution?
52.The 
Reformatsky reaction
is an addition reaction in which an organozinc reagent is used instead of a Grignard reagent to attack the
carbonyl group of an aldehyde or a ketone. Because the organozinc reagent is less reactive than a Grignard reagent,a nucleophil
icaddition to the ester group does not occur. The organozinc reagent is prepared by treating an 
a-bromo ester with zinc.CH3CH2OC2H5OCCH2COC2H5OCHOOa-carbona-hydrogensCH3COOCH3COCCH3OCHOOH3O or HOOOan   ,  -unsaturated
carbonyl compounda   ,  -unsaturated
carbonyl compounda,b-unsaturatedb,g-unsaturatedOCOHCH
OOOHOCHCHCHCHCHCHCOHCHCCHCHOOCCHCHCHOOOOOOOBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 834
Problems835Describe how each of the following compounds could be prepared,using a Reformatsky reaction:
a.c.
b.d.
53.The ketone whose spectrum is shown here was obtained as the product of an acetoacetic ester synthesis. What alkyl
halide was used in the synthesis?
54.Indicate how the following compounds could be synthesized from cyclohexanone and any other necessary reagents:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
55.Compound A with molecular formula has two peaks in its spectrum,both of which are singlets (with ratio ).
Compound A reacts with an acidic aqueous solution containing mercuric sulfate to form compound B that gives a positive

iodoform test (Section19.4) and that has an spectrum that shows two singlets (with ratio ). Identify A and B.
3:11H NMR9:11H NMRC6H10OOCOCH2CH3OOCCH2CH2CH3(two ways)OOCHOOCH2CH2CCH3OOCH2CH2CH2CH34876
9103210
5(ppm)frequency1H NMRCH3CH2CCH2COCH3OHCH2CH3OCH3CH2CHCHCOHOHCH2CH3OCCOHCH3CH2CHCH3OCH3CH2CH2CHCH2COCH3OHO
CH3CH2CHOCH3CHCOCH3ZnBran organozincreagenta   -hydroxy esterOCH3CH2CHCHCOCH3CH3H2OOOZnBrCH3CH2CHCHCOCH3CH3OOHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 835
836CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III56.Indicate how each of the following compounds could be synthesized from the given starting material and any other necessary
reagents:a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
57.Bupropion hydrochloride is an antidepressant marketed under the trade name Wellbutrin
¨. Propose a synthesis of bupropion
hydrochloride,starting with benzene.
58.What reagents would be required to carry out the following transformations?
59.Give the products of the following reactions:
a.b.60.a.Show how the amino acid alanine can be synthesized from propanoic acid.
b.Show how the amino acid glycine can be synthesized from phthalimide and diethyl 2-bromomalonate.
CH3CHCOONH3alanineCH2COONH3glycineCHCHOOOOHO2 CH3CH2OCCH2CH2COCH2CH3OO1. CH3CH2O2. H3OOOCHCHCHCCH
3OCHCHCO
OCHCHCOCH
2CH3CCHCH3NH2C(CH3)3ClOClbupropion hydrochlorideOOO(CH2)2CH3CH3CH2OC(CH2)4COCH2CH3CCH2CH3OCCH2CH2CH2COHOOOOOOCH3CCH2COCH2CH3OOCH3CCH2CH3C(CH2)3COCH3OOCH3CH3OOOCH3CCH3OOCH3CCH2CHBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 836
Problems83761.Cindy Synthon tried to prepare the following compounds using aldol condensations. Which of these compounds was she successfu
lin synthesizing? Explain why the other syntheses were not successful.a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.i.
62.Explain why the following bromoketone forms different bicyclic compounds under different reaction conditions:
63.Explain why the product obtained in the following reactions depends on the number of equivalents of base used in the reactio
n:64.A 
Mannich reaction
puts an group on the of a carbon acid. Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
OCHNHCHOOCHCHHNCHCHcatalyticHa-carbonNCH2CH3CCH2COCH2CH3OOCH3CCHCOCH2CH3OCH3O1. CH3CH2O    one equivalent2. CH3BrCH3CCH2COCH2CH3OOCH3CH2CCH2COCH2CH3OO1. CH3CH2O    two equivalents2. CH3Br3. H3O25 CLDATHF78 CCH3OCH3OHCCH3CH3BrOCOOOCH3CCH2CHCH3CCHCH3CH3CHOOCH2CH3CCCH2CH2CH3OCH3CCHCH3CCHCH3CH3CH2CH3OOCH3CHCH3CCHCHCH3OOCH3CCH3CHCHOCH2CHCCH3BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 837
838CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III65.What carbonyl compounds are required to prepare a compound with molecular formula whose spectrum is
shown?
66.Ninhydrin reacts with an amino acid to form a purple-colored compound. Propose a mechanism to account for the formation of t
hecolored compound.67.A carboxylic acid is formed when an reacts with hydroxide ion. This reaction is called a 
Favorskii reaction
. Proposea mechanism for the following Favorskii reaction. (
Hint:In the first step,removes a proton from the that is not
bonded to Br; a three-membered ring is formed in the second step; and is a nucleophile in the third step.)
68.Give the products of the following reactions. (
Hint:See Problem 67.)69.An carbonyl compound can be prepared by a reaction known as a selenenylation
Ðoxidation reaction. A selenoxide
is formed as an intermediate. Propose a mechanism for the reaction.1. LDA/THF2. C6H5SeBra selenoxide3. H2O2SeC6H5OOOO
a,b-unsaturatedOCCH3OOOBrb.a.HOH2OHOH2OCH3CH2CHCOOCH3HOH2OCH3CHCCH2CH3BrOHOa-carbonHOa-haloketoneRH2NCHCON2OCO23 H2ORCHOOOOHOHOOOOan amino acidninhydrinpurple-colored
compoundcatalyticH87653210
4 (ppm)frequency1H NMRC10H10OBRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 838
CH3orsellinic acidCOOHOHHOProblems83970.a.What carboxylic acid would be formed if the malonic ester synthesis were carried out with one equivalent of malonic ester,
oneequivalent of 1,5-dibromopentane,and two equivalents of base?
b.What carboxylic acid would be formed if the malonic ester synthesis were carried out with two equivalents of malonic ester,
one equivalent of 1,5-dibromopentane,and two equivalents of base?
71.A 
Cannizzaro reaction
is the reaction of an aldehyde that has no with concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide. In this
reaction,half the aldehyde is converted to a carboxylic acid and the other half is converted to an alcohol. Propose a reasonabl
emechanism for the following Cannizzaro reaction:
72.Propose a reasonable mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.
73.The following reaction is known as the 
benzoin condensation. The reaction will not take place if sodium hydroxide is used instead
of sodium cyanide. Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
74.Orsellinic acid,a common constituent of lichens,is synthesized from the condensation of acetyl thioester and malonyl thioest
er. If
a lichen were grown on a medium containing acetate that was radioactively labeled with at the carbonyl carbon,which carbons

would be labeled in orsellinic acid?
14CCHOCCH
OHONaCbenzoinCH3OHNOOH3OHOOHOOOH3OOCHconcentrated NaOHOCOCH2OHa-hydrogensOHNOONHCH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH3AmytalHagemannÕs esterCOCH2CH3CH3OO75.A compound known as 
Hagemann
Õs estercan be prepared by treating a mixture of formaldehyde and ethyl acetoacetate first with
base and then with acid and heat. Write the structure for the product of each of the steps.

a.The first step is an aldol-like condensation.

b.The second step is a Michael addition.

c.The third step is an intramolecular aldol condensation.

d.The fourth step is a hydrolysis followed by a decarboxylation.
76.Amobarbital is a sedative marketed under the trade name Amytal
¨. Propose a synthesis of amobarbital,using diethyl malonate and
urea as two of the starting materials.
BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 839
840CHAPTER 19Car
bonyl Compounds III77.Propose a reasonable mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.78.Tyramine is an alkaloid found in mistletoe,ripe cheese,and putrefied animal tissue. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter involved 
in theregulation of the central nervous system.
a.Give two ways to prepare from chloride.
b.How can be prepared from benzyl chloride?

c.How can be prepared from benzaldehyde?

d.How can tyramine be prepared from 

e.How can dopamine be prepared from tyramine?
79.Show how estrone,a steroid hormone,can be prepared from the given starting materials. (
Hint:Start with a Robinson annulation.)80.a.Ketoprofen,like ibuprofen,is an anti-inflammatory analgesic. How could ketoprofen be synthesized from the given starting
material?b.Ketoprofen and ibuprofen both have a propanoic acid substituent (see Problem70 in Chapter17). Explain why the identical
subunits are synthesized in different ways.
OOCHCOHCH3CH3ketoprofenOCH3OCH
2CH2CH2CCHCH
2HOestroneOH3CCH3OOHOOb-phenylethylamine?b-phenylethylamineb-phenylethylamineb-phenylethylb-phenylethylamineCH2CH2NH2HOHOHOCH2CH2NH2tyraminedopamine
CH2BrOOO
NO2OHNO2OOCCH3OCH3CH2CH3CCH2COCH2CH3OO1. CH3CH2O2. OCH2CH3BRUI19-788_840r3  01-04-2003  12:21 PM  Page 840
OOCCHOH
OCHHOCH3OHAnimportant group of organic
reactions consists of those that
involve the transfer of electrons
from one molecule to another. Organic chemists

use these reactionsÑcalled oxidationÐreduction
reactions
or redox reactions
Ñto synthesize a large
variety of compounds. Redox reactions are also important

in biological systems because many of these reactions produce

energy. You have seen a number of oxidation and reduction reactions in

other chapters,but discussing them as a group will give you the opportunity to

compare them.In an oxidationÐreduction reaction,one compound loses electrons and one com-
pound gains electrons. The compound that loses electrons is oxidized,and the one that

gains electrons is reduced. One way to remember the difference between oxidation

and reduction is with the phrase ÒLEO the lion says GERÓ:
Loss of Electrons is Oxi-
dation; Gain of Electrons is Reduction.
The following is an example of an oxidationÐreduction reaction involving inorganic
reagents:In this reaction,loses an electron,so is oxidized. gains an electron,so
is reduced. The reaction demonstrates two important points about oxidationÐ
reduction reactions. First,
oxidation is always coupled with reduction
. In other words,a
compound cannot gain electrons (be reduced) unless another compound in the reaction

simultaneously loses electrons (is oxidized). Second,the compound that is oxidized
is called the reducing agent
because it loses the electrons that are used 
to reduce the other compound Similarly,the compound that is reduced is

called the oxidizing agentbecause it gains the electrons given up by the other compound
when it is oxidized.It is easy to tell whether an organic compound has been oxidized or reduced simply
by looking at the change in the structure of the compound. We will be looking primarily
(Cu)(Fe3)(Fe3).(Cu)Fe3Fe3CuCuCuFe3Cu2Fe220More AboutOxidationÐReduction
Reactions841BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 841
842CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsReduction at carbon increases the
number of bonds or decreases 

the number of 
or bonds.
CXCN,CO,CHOxidation at carbon decreases the
number of bonds or increases 

the number of 
or bonds.
CXCN,CO,CHat reactions where oxidationor reduction
has taken place on carbon:If the reaction in-
creases the number of bonds or decreases the number of or
bonds (where X denotes a halogen),the compound has been reduced. If the
reaction decreases the number of bonds or increases the number of 
or bonds,the compound has been oxidized. Notice that the 
oxidationstateof a carbon atom equals the total number of its and bonds.
LetÕs now take a look at some examples of oxidation
Ðreduction reactions that take
place on carbon. You have seen these reactions in previous chapters. Notice that in each

of the following reactions,the product has more bonds than the reactant has:The

alkene,aldehyde,and ketone,therefore,are being reduced (Sections4.11,18.5,and

15.15). Hydrogen,sodium borohydride,and hydrazine are the reducing agents.
In the next group of reactions,the number of bonds increases in the first reac-
tion. In the second and third reactions,the number of bonds decreases and the

number of bonds increases. This means that the alkene,the aldehyde,and 

the alcohol are being oxidized. Bromine and chromic acid are the oxidizing

agents. Notice that the increase in the number of bonds in the third reaction

results from a carbonÐoxygen single bond becoming a carbonÐoxygen double bond.CO(H2CrO4)COCHCBr1. NaBH42. H3OCRHRCH2OHOan aldehydeH2NNH2HO,RCH2Ra ketoneCRROCHRRCH
2CH2RRCHan alkeneH2PtCHCXCN,CO,CXCN,CO,CHCXCN,CO,CHTutorial:
Changes in oxidation stateCH4CH3OHCH3OCH3COOHCHOCH3CCH3OCH3CCH3NCH3CH3CCH3(H)OCH3OCH3CH3CNH2OCH3OCNHCH3OCH3CClOClCClOCH3COCH3OCH3OCOCH3OHCOHOOXIDATION STATEnumber of CZ bonds(Z  O, N, or halogen)01234
oxidation reactionsreduction reactionsBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 842
Introduction843If water is added to an alkene,the product has one more bond than the reac-
tant,but it also has one more bond. In this reaction,one carbon is reduced and

another is oxidized. The two processes cancel each other as far as the overall molecule

is concerned,so the overall reaction is neither an oxidation nor a reduction.
OxidationÐreduction reactions that take place on nitrogen or sulfur show similar
structural changes. The number of or bonds increases in reduction reac-

tions,and the number of or bonds increases in oxidation reactions. In

the following reactions,nitrobenzene and the disulfide are being reduced

(Sections16.2and 23.7),and the thiol is being oxidized to a sulfonic acid:
Many oxidizing reagents and many reducing reagents are available to organic
chemists. This chapter highlights only a small fraction of the available reagents. The

ones selected are some of the more common reagents that illustrate the types of trans-
formations caused by oxidation and reduction.PROBLEM 1Indicate whether each of the following reactions is an oxidation reaction,a reduction
reaction,or neither:
a.H2partiallydeactivatedPdCCH3ClOCCH3HOSCH2CH3CH3CH2S2  CH
3CH2SHa disulfidea thiol
CH3CH2SHa thiolCH3CH2SO3Ha sulfonic acidnitrobenzeneNO2H2Pd/CHClZnHNO3NH2SONOSHNHCHRRCH
2CHRRCHHH2OOHCOCHOHCHRRCHCHR
RCHan alkeneBr2H2CrO4H2CrO4an aldehydeRCHROHan alcoholBrBrCRHOCROCRROBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 843
844CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactionsb.c.d.e.f.20.1Reduction ReactionsAn organic compound is reduced when hydrogen is added to it. A molecule of 
can be thought of as being composed of (1)two hydrogen atoms,(2)two electrons and

two protons,or (3)a hydride ion and a proton. In the sections that follow,you will see

that these three ways to describe correspond to the three mechanisms by which 

is added to an organic compound.
Reduction by Addition of Two Hydrogen Atoms
You have already seen that hydrogen can be added to carbonÐcarbon double and triple

bonds in the presence of a metal catalyst (Sections4.11and 6.8). These reactions,

called catalytic hydrogenations
,are reduction reactions because there are more
bonds in the products than in the reactants. Alkenes and alkynes are both re-
duced to alkanes.In a catalytic hydrogenation,the bond breaks homolytically (Section4.11).
This means that the reduction reaction involves the addition of two hydrogen atoms to

the organic molecule.
We have seen that the catalytic hydrogenation of an alkyne can be stopped at a cis
alkene if a partially deactivated catalyst is used (Section6.8).
Only the alkene substituent is reduced in the following reaction. The very stable benzene
ring can be reduced only under special conditions.LindlarcatalystCCH3CH3CH2CCCH3CH3HH2-butynecis-2-buteneHH1-buteneCH3CH2CHCH
2H2butaneCH3CH2CH2CH3Pt, Pd, or Ni1-pentyneCH3CH2CH2CCH2 H
2pentaneCH3CH2CH2CH2CH3Pt, Pd, or NiCHcomponents of H:HHHtwo hydrogen atomsHHtwo electrons and two protonsHa hydride ion and a protonHH2H2H2(H2)CH3CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2BrHONCH
3CH2NH2CH3CH2PtCH3CH2OHH2CrO4CCH3OHOBr2hBrCHRRCH
2CHRRCHHBrBrMovie:Catalytic hydrogenationsBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  2:42 PM  Page 844Section 20.1Reduction Reactions
8453-D Molecules:Styrene;
Ethyl benzeneMurray Raney (1885Ð1966)wasborn in Kentucky. He received a B.A.

from the University of Kentucky in

1909,and in 1951 the university

awarded him an honorary Doctor 

of Science. He worked at the Gilman

Paint and Varnish Co. in

Chattanooga,Tennessee,were he

patented several chemical and

metallurgical processes. In 1963,

the company was sold and renamed

W. R. Grace & Co.,Raney Catalyst

Division.Catalytic hydrogenation can also be used to reduce carbon
Ðnitrogen double and triplebonds. The reaction products are amines.
The carbonyl group of ketones and aldehydes can be reduced by catalytic hydro-
genation,with Raney nickel as the metal catalyst. (Raney nickel is finely dispersed

nickel with adsorbed hydrogen,so an external source of is not needed.) Aldehydes

are reduced to primary alcohols,and ketones are reduced to secondary alcohols.
The reduction of an acyl chloride can be stopped at an aldehyde if a partially deac-
tivated catalyst is used. This reaction is known as the 
Rosenmund reduction
. The cat-
alyst for the Rosenmund reduction is similar to the partially deactivated palladium

catalyst used to stop the reduction of an alkyne at a cisalkene (Section6.8).
The carbonyl groups of carboxylic acids,esters,and amides are less reactive,so
they are harder to reduce than the carbonyl groups of aldehydes and ketones

(Section18.5). They cannot be reduced by catalytic hydrogenation (except under ex-

treme conditions). They can,however,be reduced by a method we will discuss later in

this section.COCOa carboxylic acidno reactionH2Raney Nino reactionH2Raney Nino reactionH2Raney Nian esteran amideCH3CH2OHCOCH3CH2OCH3CH3CH2NHCH3COan acyl chloridean aldehyde
H2partiallydeactivatedPdCH3CH2ClCCH3CH2HOOHCH3CH2CHCH3H2Raney NiH2Raney Nia secondary alcohola ketoneCH3CH2CH2CH2OHa primary alcoholan aldehydeCCH3CH2CH3OCCH3CH2CH2HOH2CH3CH2CHNCH
3H2CH3CH2CH2NHCH3Pd/CPd/CCH3CH2CH2CNmethylpropylaminebutylamineCH3CH2CH2CH2NH22 H2CH2CHH2Pd/CCH2CH3Karl W. Rosenmund (1884
Ð1964)was born in Berlin. He was a
professor of chemistry at the

University of Kiel.
BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 845
PROBLEM 2Give the products of the following reactions:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
Reduction by Addition of an Electron, a Proton,
an Electron, and a Proton
When a compound is reduced using sodium in liquid ammonia,sodium donates an
electron to the compound and ammonia donates a proton. This sequence is then re-

peated,so the overall reaction adds two electrons and two protons to the compound.

Such a reaction is known as a 
dissolving-metal reduction
.In Section6.8,you saw the mechanism for the dissolving-metal reduction that con-
verts an alkyne to a transalkene.
Sodium (or lithium) in liquid ammonia cannot reduce a carbon
Ðcarbon double bond.This makes it a useful reagent for reducing a triple bond in a compound that also con-

tains a double bond.Reduction by Addition of a Hydride Ion and a Proton
Carbonyl groups are easily reduced by metal hydrides such as sodium borohydride
or lithium aluminum hydride. The actual reducing agent in 
metal-hydride
reductions
is hydride ion Hydride ion adds to the carbonyl carbon,and the
alkoxide ion that is formed is subsequently protonated. In other words,the carbonyl

group is reduced by adding an followed by an The mechanisms for reduction

by these reagents are discussed in Section18.5.
H3OCOCOHCOHH.H(H).(NaBH4)Na or LiNH3 (liq)CHCH2CCCH
3CH3CCCCH3HHCH3CHCH2CH3CCH3Na or LiNH3 (liq)CCH3CH3C2-butynetrans-2-buteneCCH3CHHCH3H2Pd/CNCH3OCH3COCH3H2Raney NiH2Raney NiOCH3CH2CH2CCCH
3H2LindlarcatalystOCH3CClH2Raney NiH2Pd/CCH3CH2CH2CNOCH3CClH2partiallydeactivatedPdOCH3CH2CH2CH2CHH2Raney Ni846CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 846
Section 20.1Reduction Reactions
847Aldehydes,ketones,and acyl halides can be reduced by sodium borohydride.
The metalÐhydrogen bonds in lithium aluminum hydride are more polar than the
metalÐhydrogen bonds in sodium borohydride. As a result,is a stronger
reducing agent than Consequently,both and reduce

aldehydes,ketones,and acyl halides,but is not generally used for this pur-

pose since is safer and easier to use. is generally used to reduce only

compoundsÑsuch as carboxylic acids,esters,and amides
Ñthat cannot be reducedby the milder reagent.If diisobutylaluminum hydride (DIBALH) is used as the hydride donor at a low
temperature instead of the reduction of the ester can be stopped after the

addition of one equivalent of hydride ion. Therefore,the final products of the reaction

are an aldehyde and an alcohol (Section18.5).
Replacing some of the hydrogens of with OR groups decreases the reactivity
of the metal hydride. For example,lithium tri-
tert-butoxyaluminum hydride reduces
an acyl chloride to an aldehyde,whereas reduces the acyl chloride all the way

to an alcohol.1. LiAl[OC(CH3)3]3H, 78 ¼C2. H2Oan aldehydean acyl chlorideCH3CH2CH2CH2ClCH
3CH2CH2CH2HCOCOLiAlH4LiAlH4LiAlH4,CH3CH2CH2OHa primary alcoholan esterCH3CH2CH2CH2OHH
2O1. LiAlH42. H3O1. LiAlH42. H3Oa primary alcohola carboxylic acidCH3OHCCH3CH2CH2OHOCOCH3CH2OCH3LiAlH4NaBH4LiAlH4NaBH4LiAlH4NaBH4.LiAlH4OHCH3CH2CH2CHCH3a secondary alcohola ketoneCH3CH2CH2CH2OH1. NaBH42. H3O1. NaBH42. H3Oa primary alcoholan aldehydeCCH3CH2CH2HOCCH3CH2CH2an acyl chlorideCH3OCH3CH2CH2CH2OHa primary alcohol1. NaBH42. H3OCCH3CH2CH2ClORemember, the numbers in front of the
reagents above or below a reaction

arrow indicate that the second reagent

is not added until reaction with the first

reagent is completed.
1. [(CH3)2CHCH2]2AlH, 78 ¼C2. H2Oan aldehydean esterCCH3CH2CH2OCH3OCOCH3CH2CH2HCH3OHBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 847
848CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsThecarbonyl group of an amide is reduced to a methylene group by lithium
aluminum hydride (Section 18.5). Primary,secondary,and tertiary amines are formed,

depending on the number of substituents bonded to the nitrogen of the amide. To obtain

the amine in its neutral basic form,acid is not used in the second step of the reaction.
Because sodium borohydride cannot reduce an ester,an amide,or a carboxylic acid,
it can be used to selectively reduce an aldehyde or a ketone group in a compound that

also contains a less reactive group. Acid is not used in the second step of the following

reaction,in order to avoid hydrolyzing the ester:
The multiply bonded carbon atoms of alkenes and alkynes do not possess a partial
positive charge and therefore will not react with reagents that reduce compounds by

donating a hydride ion.Because sodium borohydride cannot reduce carbon
Ðcarbon double bonds,a carbonyl
group in a compound that also has an alkene functional group can be selectively

reduced,as long as the double bonds are not conjugated (Section18.13). Acid is not

used in the second step of the reaction,in order to avoid addition to the double bond.
A chemoselective reaction
is a reaction in which a reagent reacts with one func-tional group in preference to another. For example,in isopropyl alcohol re-

duces aldehydes faster than it reduces ketones.
OOOHOHNaBH4isopropyl alcoholNaBH4CH3CHOHCHCH2CH3CHCHCH2CHCH31. NaBH42. H2OCH3COCH3CH2CHCH
2no reduction reactionNaBH4CH3CH2CCH
no reduction reactionNaBH4OOOCH3 OHOOCH31. NaBH42. H2OCH3CH2CH2CH2NHCH3a secondary amineCH3CH2CH2CH2NH21. LiAlH42. H2OCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2NCH3a tertiary amine1. LiAlH42. H2O1. LiAlH42. H2Oa primary amineCH3CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2NHCH3CH3CH2CH2NCH3COCOCO(CH2)Tutorial:
ReductionsBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 848
Section 20.1Reduction Reactions
849In contrast,in aqueous ethanol at in the presence of cerium trichloride
reduces ketones faster than it reduces aldehydes. There are many reducing reagents
Ñand conditions under which those reagents should be used
Ñavailable to the synthetic
chemist. We can cover only a fraction of these in this chapter.
PROBLEM 3Explain why terminal alkynes cannot be reduced by Na in liquid 
PROBLEM 4Give the products of the following reactions:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
PROBLEM 5Can carbonÐnitrogen double and triple bonds be reduced by lithium aluminum hydride?
Explain your answer.
PROBLEM 6Give the products of the following reactions (assume that excess reducing agent is used in d):
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 7SOLVED
How could you synthesize the following compounds from starting materials containing no
more than four carbons?a.b.
OHOOCH2COCH31. LiAlH42. H2OOH2PtCOCH3OO1. NaBH42. H2OCH2COCH3O1. NaBH42. H2OCCH3OCH3CH2CH2COH1. LiAlH42. H3OOCH3CH2CCH2CH31. NaBH42. H3OOCH3CH2CNHCH2CH31. LiAlH42. H2OO1. LiAlH42. H3OCOHO1. LiAlH42. H3OCOCH2CH3O1. LiAlH42. H2OCNH2NH3.OOHOHOHNaBH4, CeCl3C2H5OH/H2O15 C15 ¡CNaBH4BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 849
850CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsSOLUTION TO 7a
The six-membered ring indicates that the compound can be synthe-
sized by means of a DielsÐAlder reaction.20.2Oxidation of AlcoholsOxidation is the reverse of reduction. For example,a ketone is 
reduced
to a secondaryalcohol,and the reverse reaction is the 
oxidationof a secondary alcohol to a ketone.
Areagent that is often used to oxidize alcohols is chromic acid which is
formed when chromium trioxide or sodium dichromate is dis-

solved in aqueous acid. These reactions are easily recognized as oxidations because

the number of bonds in the reactant decreases and the number of bonds

increases.Primary alcohols are initially oxidized to aldehydes by these reagents. The reaction,
however,does not stop at the aldehyde. Instead,the aldehyde is further oxidized to a

carboxylic acid.Notice that the oxidation of either a primary or a secondary alcohol involves re-
moval of a hydrogen from the carbon to which the OH is attached. The carbon bearing

the OH group in a tertiary alcohol is not bonded to a hydrogen,so the OH group can-

not be oxidized to a carbonyl group.
Chromic acid and the other chromium-containing oxidizing reagents oxidize an al-cohol by first forming a chromate ester. The carbonyl compound is formed when the

chromate ester undergoes an E2 elimination (Section11.1).
CH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CHOa primary alcoholan aldehyde
CH3CH2CH2COHOa carboxylic acidH2CrO4furtheroxidation[]OHOHOOOCH3CH2CHCH3OHCHCH2CH3CH3CH2CCH3secondary alcoholsketones
CrO3H2SO4Na2Cr2O7H2SO4H2CrO4CCH2CH3COCH(Na2Cr2O7)(CrO3)(H2CrO4),ketonesecondary alcohol
reductionoxidationH2Raney NiOOHOH
H3-D Molecules:Chromic acid;
Chromium trioxide;
Sodium dichromatea chromate ester
CrOH
OOHOCrOH
HOOHOCrOH
HOOORCH2RCH2OHBH2OH2CrO
3CrOH
HBHOOORCHRCHORCHH2OHBan E2 reactionmechanism for alcohol oxidation by chromic acidBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 850
Section 20.2Oxidation of Alcohols
851person breathes intomouthpieceglass tube containingsodium dichromateÐsulfuric acid coated on
silica gel particlesas person blows into the tube, the plastic bag becomes inflatedAny ethanol in the breath is oxidized as it passes through the
column. When ethanol is oxidized,the red-orange oxidizing

agent is reduced to green chromic ion. The greater

the concentration of alcohol in the breath,the farther the green

color spreads through the tube.If the person fails this test
Ñdetermined by the extent to
which the green color spreads through the tubeÑa moreaccurate Breathalyzer¨test is administered. The Breathalyzer
¨test also depends on the oxidation of breath ethanol by sodium

dichromate,but it provides more accurate results because it is

quantitative. In the test,a known volume of breath is bubbled

through an acidic solution of sodium dichromate,and the

concentration of chromic ion is measured precisely with a

spectrophotometer.
CH3CH2OHCr
2O72HCH3COHOCr3+red orangegreen
(Cr2O7 2)BLOOD ALCOHOL CONTENTAs blood passes through the arteries in the lungs,
an equilibrium is established between the alcohol
in one
Õs blood and the alcohol in one
Õs breath. So if the concen-
tration of one is known,the concentration of the other can be

estimated. The test that law enforcement agencies use to ap-

proximate a personÕs blood alcohol level is based on the oxida-
tion of breath ethanol by sodium dichromate. The test employs

a sealed glass tube that contains the oxidizing agent impregnat-

ed onto an inert material. The ends of the tube are broken off,

and one end of the tube is attached to a mouthpiece and the

other to a balloon-type bag. The person undergoing the test

blows into the mouthpiece until the bag is filled with air.
The oxidation of a primary alcohol can be easily stopped at the aldehyde if pyridini-
um chlorochromate (PCC) is used as the oxidizing agent and the reaction is carried out
in an anhydrous solvent such as dichloromethane,as explained in the following box:
OCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CHa primary alcoholan aldehyde
PCCCH2Cl2The oxidation reaction can be stopped at the aldehyde if thereaction is carried out with pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC),

because PCC is used in an anhydrous solvent. If water is not

present,the hydrate cannot be formed.
CH3CH2OHCH3CHOCH3CHOHOHHH2OCH3COHOH2CrO
4H2CrO
4THE ROLE OF HYDRATES IN THE
OXIDATION OF PRIMARY

ALCOHOLSWhen a primary alcohol is oxidized to a carboxylic acid,the
alcohol is initially oxidized to an aldehyde,which is in equilibri-

um with its hydrate (Section 18.7). It is the hydrate that is subse-

quently oxidized to a carboxylic acid.3-D Molecules:Pyridinium chlorochromate
(PCC); Dimethyl sulfoxide;
Oxalyl chlorideBecauseof the toxicity of chromium-based reagents,other methods for the oxi-
dation of alcohols have been developed. One of the most widely employed meth-

ods,called the 
Swern oxidation
,uses dimethyl sulfoxide oxalyl
chloride and triethylamine. Since the reaction is 
notcarried out in an
[(COCl)2],[(CH3)2SO],BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 851
852CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactionsaqueous solution,the oxidation of a primary alcohol (like PCC oxidation) stops at
the aldehyde. Secondary alcohols are oxidized to ketones.
The actual oxidizing agent in the Swern oxidation is dimethylchlorosulfonium ion,which
is formed from the reaction of dimethyl sulfoxide and oxalyl chloride. Like chromic acid

oxidation,the Swern oxidation uses an E2 reaction to form the aldehyde or ketone.
To understand how dimethyl sulfoxide and oxalyl chloride react to form the dimethyl-
chlorosulfonium ion,see Problem64.
PROBLEM 8Give the product formed from the reaction of each of the following alcohols with
a.an acidic solution of sodium dichromate:
b.the reagents required for a Swern oxidation:
1.3-pentanol3.2-methyl-2-pentanol5.cyclohexanol
2.1-pentanol4.2,4-hexanediol6.1,4-butanediol
PROBLEM 9Propose a mechanism for the chromic acid oxidation of 1-propanol to propanal.PROBLEM 10SOLVED
How could butanone be prepared from butane?
SOLUTIONWe know that the first reaction has to be a radical halogenation because
that is the only reaction that an alkane undergoes. Bromination will lead to a greater yield
of the desired 2-halo-substituted compound than will chlorination because the bromine
radical is more selective than a chlorine radical. To maximize the yield of substitution

product (Section 11.8),the alkyl bromide is treated with acetate ion and the ester is then

hydrolyzed to the alcohol,which forms the target compound when it is oxidized.
CH3CH2CH2CH3OCH3CCH2CH3?butanebutanone
CH3CH2CH2OHa primary alcoholan aldehydeCH3CH2CHCH3OHa secondary alcohola ketoneCH3SCH3,OClC
CCl, 60 COO1.2. triethylamineCH3SCH3,OClC
CCl, 60 COO1.
2. triethylamineCH3CH2HCCH3CH2CH3OCOCOH
R(H)HRCOR(H)
HRHClCH3SCH3(CH3CH2)3NCOCH3CH3ClCH3CH3SSCOR(H)R(H)HRRCH3CH3HClSaldehydeorketonetriethylaminealcoholdimethylchlorosulfonium
ionmechanism of the Swern oxidationan E2 reactionCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CHCH2CH3BrCH3CHCH2CH3OHBr2Na2Cr2O7H2SO41. CH3COO2. HCl, H2OCH3CCH2CH3OhBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:59 PM  Page 852Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Adolf
von Baeyer (1835
Ð1917)started hisstudy of chemistry under Bunsen and

Kekul” at the University of Heidel-

berg and received a Ph.D. from the

University of Berlin,studying under

Hofmann. (See also Section2.11.)
Section 20.3Oxidation of Aldehydes and Ketones
85320.3Oxidation of Aldehydes and KetonesAldehydes are oxidized to carboxylic acids. Because aldehydes are generally easier to
oxidize than primary alcohols,any of the reagents described in the preceding section

for oxidizing primary alcohols to carboxylic acids can be used to oxidize aldehydes to

carboxylic acids.Silver oxide is a mild oxidizing agent. A dilute solution of silver oxide in aqueous
ammonia (Tollens reagent
) will oxidize an aldehyde,but it is too weak to oxidize an
alcohol or any other functional group. An advantage to using Tollens reagent to oxi-

dize an aldehyde is that the reaction occurs under basic conditions. Therefore,you do

not have to worry about harming other functional groups in the molecule that may un-

dergo a reaction in an acidic solution.
The oxidizing agent in Tollens reagent is which is reduced to metallic silver.
The Tollens test
is based on this reaction:If Tollens reagent is added to a small
amount of an aldehyde in a test tube,the inside of the test tube becomes coated with a

shiny mirror of metallic silver. Consequently,if a mirror is not formed when Tollens

reagent is added to a compound,it can be concluded that the compound does not have

an aldehyde functional group.Ketones do not react with most of the reagents used to oxidize aldehydes. However,
both aldehydes andketones can be oxidized by a peroxyacid. Aldehydes are oxidized
to carboxylic acids and ketones are oxidized to esters. A 
peroxyacid
(also called a per-carboxylic acid or an acyl hydroperoxide) contains one more oxygen than a carboxylic

acid,and it is this oxygen that is inserted between the carbonyl carbon and the H of an

aldehyde or the R of a ketone. The reaction is called a 
Baeyer
ÐVilliger oxidation
.If the two alkyl substituents attached to the carbonyl group of the ketone are not the
same,on which side of the carbonyl carbon is the oxygen inserted? For example,does
Ag,COAg1. Ag2O, NH32. H3OmetallicsilverCH3CH2HCH
3CH2OHCONa2Cr2O7H2SO4aldehydesH2CrO4carboxylic acidsCH3CH2OHCH3CH2HHCOCOCOOHCOa carboxylic acida peroxyacidan aldehydeBaeyer-Villiger oxidationsan estera peroxyacida ketoneCH3CH2CH2HCH3CH2CH2CH3ROOHROH
CH3CH2OCH2CH3ROOH
CH3CH2CH2OHROH
COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOBernhard Tollens (1841
Ð1918)wasborn in Germany. He was a professor

of chemistry at the University of

Gıttingen,the same university from

which he received a Ph.D.
Victor Villiger (1868
Ð1934)wasBaeyerÕs student. The two published

the first paper on the BaeyerÐVilliger

oxidation in Chemische Berichtein 1899.BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 853
854CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactionsthe oxidation of cyclohexyl methyl ketone form methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate or cy-
clohexyl acetate?
To answer this question,we must look at the mechanism of the reaction. The ketone
and the peroxyacid react to form an unstable tetrahedral intermediate with a very weak
bond. As the bond breaks heterolytically,one of the alkyl groups
migrates to an oxygen. This rearrangement is similar to the 1,2-shifts that occur when

carbocations rearrange (Section4.6).
Several studies have established the following order of group migration tendencies:
Therefore,the product of the Baeyer
ÐVilliger oxidation of cyclohexyl methyl ketone
will be cyclohexyl acetate because a secondary alkyl group (the cyclohexyl group) is

more likely to migrate than a methyl group. Aldehydes are always oxidized to car-

boxylic acids,since H has the greatest tendency to migrate.
PROBLEM 11Give the products of the following reactions:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.OCH3CH2CH2CCH31. Ag2O, NH32. H3OOCH3RCOOHOOCH3CH2CH2CH1. Ag2O, NH32. H3OOCHRCOOHOOCCH3CHCH3CH3CH3CCH3RCOOHOOCCH2CH3RCOOHOOOOORCOOHOor?cyclohexyl methylketonemethylcyclohexanecarboxylatecyclohexylacetateCH3OCH3COCOOCH3COOCCH3CH3COOHCOOBCH3COORCOOHOROCCH3RCOOORHBan unstableintermediateRORmechanism of the BaeyerÐVilliger oxidationCORRHtert-alkylsec-alkylphenyl
primary alkylmethyl
relative migration tendencies
most likelyto migrateleast likely
to migrateBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 854
Section 20.4Oxidation of Alkenes with Peroxyacids
85520.4Oxidation of Alkenes with Peroxyacids
An alkene can be oxidized to an epoxide by a peroxyacid. The overall reaction
amounts to the transfer of an oxygen atom from the peroxyacid to the alkene.
Recall than an bond is weak and easily broken (Section20.3).
The oxygen atom of the OH group of the peroxyacid accepts a pair of electrons from
the bond of the alkene,causing the weak bond to break heterolytically. The

electrons from the bond are delocalized onto the carbonyl group. The electrons

left behind as the bond breaks add to the carbon of the alkene that becomes elec-

tron deficient when the bond breaks. Notice that 
epoxidationof an alkene is a concert-
ed reaction:All the bond-forming and bond-breaking processes take place in a single step.
The mechanism for the addition of oxygen to a double bond to form an epoxide is
analogous to the mechanism described in Section4.7for the addition of bromine to a

double bond to form a cyclic bromonium ion. In one case the electrophile is oxygen,

and in the other it is bromine. So the reaction of an alkene with a peroxyacid,like the

reaction of an alkene with is an electrophilic addition reaction.
The addition of oxygen to an alkene is a stereospecific reaction. Because the reaction
is concerted,the bond cannot rotate,so there is no opportunity for the relative

positions of the groups bonded to the carbons of the alkene to change. Therefore,a

cis alkene forms a cis epoxide. Similarly,a trans alkene forms a trans epoxide.
H3CCH
3H3CCH
3HCORCOOHORCOOHOCHH3CHCH3CCHH3CHCHCH
3CHHCCOcis-2-butenecis-2,3-dimethyloxiranetrans-2-butenetrans-2,3-dimethyloxiraneH3CHCHCH
3COsp2CCCCCCBr
BrBrBrBr2,mechanism for epoxidation of an alkeneCCCCOOHOCROOROCHpOHOOOOpCROOOH
a weak bondOORCOOHOORCOHORCHCH
2a peroxyacidan alkeneRCHCH
2an epoxidea carboxylic acid
3-D Molecules:Peroxyacetic acid;
m-Chloroperoxybenzoic acid3-D Molecules:cis-2,3-Dimethyloxirane;trans-2,3-DimethyloxiraneBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 855
856CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsBecause the oxygen can add from the top or the bottom of the plane containing the
double bond,trans
-2-butene forms a pair of enantiomers; 
cis-2-butene forms a meso
compoundÑit and its mirror image are identical (Section5.10).
Increasing the electron density of the double bond increases the rate of epoxidation
because it makes the double bond more nucleophilic. Alkyl substituents increase the

electron density of the double bond. Therefore,if a diene is treated with only enough

peroxyacid to react with one of the double bonds,it will be the most substituted dou-

ble bond that is epoxidized.PROBLEM 12What alkene would you treat with a peroxyacid in order to obtain each of the following
epoxides?a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 13Give the major product of the reaction of each of the following compounds with one equiv-
alent of a peroxyacid. Indicate the configuration of the product.
a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 14Show how the following target molecules could be synthesized from propene:
a.1-methoxy-2-propanolc.2-butanone
b.2-butanol
PROBLEM 15Explain why an epoxide is a relatively stable product,whereas a bromonium ion is a reac-
tive intermediate.
CH2CH2CHCCH3CHCH3CHCH3CH3H3CCH
2CH3CHHCOH2CCHCH
2CH3OH2CH3CHCHCH2CH3COORCOOHOOORCOHOlimoneneone equivalentBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 856
Section 20.5Designing a Synthesis VII: Controlling Stereochemistry
85720.5Designing a Synthesis VII:Controlling Stereochemistry
The target molecule of a synthesis may be one of several stereoisomers. The actual
number of stereoisomers depends on the number of double bonds and asymmetric
carbons in the molecule because each double bond can exist in an 
Eor Zconfigu-
ration (Section3.5) and each asymmetric carbon can have an 
Ror Sconfiguration
(Section5.6). In addition,if the target molecule has rings with a common bond,

the rings can be either trans fused or cis fused (Section2.15). In designing a syn-

thesis,care must be taken to make sure that each double bond,each asymmetric

carbon,and each ring fusion in the target molecule has the appropriate configura-

tion. If the stereochemistry of the reactions is not controlled,the resulting mixture

of stereoisomers may be difficult or even impossible to separate. Therefore,in

planning a synthesis,an organic chemist must consider the stereochemical out-

comes of all reactions and must use highly stereoselective reactions to achieve the

desired configurations. Some stereoselective reactions are also 
enantioselective;an enantioselective reaction
forms more of one enantiomer than of another.
We have seen that an enantiomerically pure target molecule can be obtained if
an enzyme is used to catalyze the reaction that forms the target molecule. Enzyme-

catalyzed reactions result in the exclusive formation of one enantiomer since en-

zymes are chiral (Section5.20). For example,ketones are enzymatically reduced

to alcohols by enzymes called alcohol dehydrogenases. Whether the 
Ror the Senantiomer is formed depends on the particular alcohol dehydrogenase used:Al-

cohol dehydrogenase from the bacterium 
Lactobacillus kefir
forms Ralcohols,whereas alcohol dehydrogenases from yeast,horse liver,and the bacterium

Thermoanaerobium brocki
form Salcohols. The alcohol dehydrogenases use
NADPH to carry out the reduction (Section25.2). Using an enzyme-catalyzed re-

action to control the configuration of a target molecule is not a universally useful

method because enzymes require substrates of very specific size and shape

(Section24.8).
Alternatively,an enantiomerically pure catalyst that is not an enzyme can be used
to obtain an enantiomerically pure target molecule. For example,an enantiomerically

pure epoxide of an allylic alcohol can be prepared by treating the alcohol with 
tert-butyl hydroperoxide,titanium isopropoxide,and enantiomerically pure diethyl tar-

trate (DET). The structure of the epoxide depends on the enantiomer of diethyl

tartrate used.(R)-2,2,2-trifluoro-1-phenyl-1-ethanolNADPHNADPHLactobacillus kefiralcohol dehydrogenase(S)-2,2,2-trifluoro-1-phenyl-1-ethanolNADPHNADPHThermoanaerobium brockialcohol dehydrogenaseCCF3OCOHCCF3OHCF3COHCF3HBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 857
858CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsThis method,developed in 1980 by Barry Sharpless,has proven to be useful for the
synthesis of a wide variety of enantiomerically pure compounds,because an epoxide

can easily be converted into a compound with two adjacent asymmetric carbons,since

epoxides are very susceptible to attack by nucleophiles. In the following example,an

allylic alcohol is converted into an enantiomerically pure epoxide,which is used to

form an enantiomerically pure diol.PROBLEM 16What is the product of the reaction of methylmagnesium bromide with either of the enan-
tiomerically pure epoxides that can be prepared from (
E)-3-methyl-2-pentene by the pre-ceding method? Assign 
Ror Sconfigurations to the asymmetric carbons of each product.
PROBLEM 17Is the addition of to an alkene such as 
trans
-2-pentene a stereoselective reaction? Is it
a stereospecific reaction? Is it an enantioselective reaction?
20.6Hydroxylation of Alkenes
An alkene can be oxidized to a 1,2-diol either by potassium permanganate 
in a cold basic solution or by osmium tetroxide The solution of potassium per-

manganate must be basic,and the oxidation must be carried out at room temperature

or below. If the solution is heated or if it is acidic,the diol will be oxidized further

(Section20.8). A diol is also called a 
glycol. The OH groups are on adjacent carbons
in 1,2-diols,so 1,2-diols are also known as 
vicinal diolsor vicinal glycols.Bothand form a cyclic intermediate when they react with an alkene.
The reactions occur because manganese and osmium are in a highly positive oxidation

state and,therefore,attract electrons. (Since the oxidation state is given by the number
OsO4KMnO4OHCH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CHCH2OH1. OsO4 2. H2O2a vicinal diolOHOH
CH3CHCHCH
3CH3CHCHCH
3KMnO4, HO, H2Ocolda vicinal diol(OsO4).(KMnO4)Br2HCH
2OHRHan allyl alcoholt-BuOOH(isoPrO)4Ti()DETt-BuOOH(isoPrO)4Ti()DETOOHCH2OHRHHCH2OHRHK. Barry Sharpless
was born inPhiladelphia in 1941. He received a

B.A. from Dartmouth in 1963 and a

Ph.D. in chemistry from Stanford in

1968. He served as a professor at

MIT and Stanford. Currently,he is 

at the Scripps Research Institute in

La Jolla,California. He received the

2001 Nobel Prize in chemistry for his

work on chirally catalyzed oxidation

reactions. (See also Section24.3.)
Tutorial:
Hydroxylation reactionsÑsynthesisHOC6H5CH21.  NaH, C6H5CH2Br2.  H3Ot-BuOOH(isoPrO)4Ti()DETHOOOHOHOHBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 858
Section 20.7Oxidative Cleavage of 1,2-Diols
859of bonds to oxygen,magnesium and osmium have oxidations states of and 
respectively.) Formation of the cyclic intermediate is a syn addition because both

oxygens are delivered to the same side of the double bond. Therefore,the oxidation

reaction is stereospecific
Ña cis cycloalkene forms only a cis diol.
The cyclic osmate intermediate is hydrolyzed with hydrogen peroxide that reoxidizes
osmium to osmium tetroxide.Higher yields of the diol are obtained with osmium tetroxide because the cyclic
osmate intermediate is less likely to undergo side reactions.
PROBLEM 18Give the products that would be formed from the reaction of each of the following alkenes
with ,followed by aqueous 
a.b.
PROBLEM 19What stereoisomers would be formed from the reaction of each of the following alkenes
with followed by ?
a.trans
-2-butenec.
cis-2-penteneb.cis-2-butened.
trans
-2-pentene20.7Oxidative Cleavage of 1,2-Diols1,2-Diols are oxidized to ketones and/or aldehydes by periodic acid Periodic
acid reacts with the diol to form a cyclic intermediate. The reaction takes place be-

cause iodine is in a highly positive oxidation state so it readily accepts electrons.

When the intermediate breaks down,the bond between the two carbons bonded to the

OH groups breaks. If the carbon that is bonded to an OH group is also bonded to two
(7),(HIO4).H2O2 OsO4CH2CH3CCH3CHCH2CH3H2O2 :OsO4HHHHOsOsOsO
3OHOHH2O2cyclohexenea cyclic osmateintermediatecis-1,2-cyclohexanediolmechanism for cis glycol formationOOOOOOOOMnMnO
2HHMnOOOOOOOOa cyclic manganateintermediateHHOHOHH2Ocyclopentenemechanism for cis glycol formationcis-1,2-cyclopentanediol8,73-D Molecules:Potassium permanganateOsmium tetroxide (OsO
4)(KMnO4);BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 859
860CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsR groups,the product will be a ketone. If the carbon is bonded to an R and an H,the
product will be an aldehyde. Because this oxidation reaction cuts the reactant into two

pieces,it is called an 
oxidative cleavage
.PROBLEM 20An alkene is treated with followed by . When the resulting diol is treated with
the only product obtained is an unsubstituted cyclic ketone with molecular formula
What is the structure of the alkene?
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Of the following five compounds,explain why only 
Dcannot be cleaved by periodic acid.
To figure out why one of a series of similar compounds is unreactive,we first need to con-
sider what kinds of compounds undergo the reaction and any stereochemical requirements

of the reaction. We know that periodic acid cleaves 1,2-diols. Because the reaction forms a

cyclic intermediate,the two OH groups of the diol must be positioned so that they can form

the intermediate.The two OH groups of a 1,2-cyclohexanediol can both be equatorial,they can both be
axial,or one can be equatorial and the other axial.
In a cis 1,2-cyclohexanediol,one OH is equatorial and the other is axial. Because both 
cis 1,2-diols (A and E) are cleaved,we know that the cyclic intermediate can be formed

when the OH groups are in these positions. In a trans 1,2-diol,both OH groups are equato-

rial orboth are axial (Section2.14). Two of the trans 1,2-diols can be cleaved (B and C),
and one cannot (D). We can conclude that the one that cannot be cleaved must have both

OH groups in axial positions because they would be too far from each other to form a
OHOHOHOHboth equatorialtransOHboth axialtransOHone equatorial, one axialcisC6H10O.HIO4,H2O2 OsO4CH3OHOHHIO4HIO3HOOCH3CCHCH
3CH3HOHIO4OOOOOIOHa ketonean aldehyde
CH3CCHCH
3CCH3CH3CH3CHIO
3H2OOHCH3OHOHOH
OHOHOHOHOHOHOHOH(CH3)3C(CH3)3C(CH3)3CABC
DEBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 860
Section 20.8Oxidative Cleavage of Alkenes
861cyclic intermediate. Now we need to draw the most stable conformers of B,C,and D to see
why only D has both OH groups in axial positions.The most stable conformer of B is the one with both OH groups in equatorial positions.
The steric requirements of the bulky 
tert-butyl group force it into an equatorial posi-
tion,where there is more room for such a large substituent. This causes both OH groups

in compound C to be in equatorial positions and both OH groups in compound D to be

in axial positions. Therefore,C can be cleaved by periodic acid,but D cannot.
Now continue on to Problem 21.
PROBLEM 21Which of each pair of diols is cleaved more rapidly by periodic acid?
a.b.
20.8Oxidative Cleavage of AlkenesOzonolysisWe have seen that alkenes can be oxidized to 1,2-diols and that 1,2-diols can be further
oxidized to aldehydes and ketones (Sections20.6and 20.7,respectively). Alternative-

ly,alkenes can be directly oxidized to aldehydes and ketones by ozone When an

alkene is treated with ozone at low temperatures,the double bond breaks and the car-

bons that were doubly bonded to each other find themselves doubly bonded to oxy-

gens instead. This oxidation reaction is known as 
ozonolysis.Ozoneis produced by passing oxygen gas through an electric discharge. The struc-
ture of ozone can be represented by the following resonance contributors:
Ozone and the alkene undergo a concerted cycloaddition reaction
Ñthe oxygen atomsadd to the two carbons in a single step. The addition of ozone to the alkene should

remind you of the electrophilic addition reactions of alkenes discussed in Chapter4.

An electrophile adds to one of the carbons,and a nucleophile adds to the other.

The electrophile is the oxygen at one end of the ozone molecule,and the nucleophile

is the oxygen at the other end. The product of ozone addition to an alkene is a
sp2sp2OOOOOOOOOOOOresonance contributors of ozoneCCCCOO1. O3, 78 C2. work-up(O3).orOHOHOHOHC(CH3)3C(CH3)3OHOHOHOHC(CH3)3orC(CH3)3OHOH
OHOH(CH3)3C(CH3)3COHOHBCDBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 861
862CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactionsmolozonide. (The name ÒmolozonideÓindicates that one mole of ozone has added to
the alkene.) The molozonide is unstable because it has two bonds; it immedi-

ately rearranges to a more stable ozonide.Ozonides are explosive,so they are seldom isolated. In solution,they are easily
cleaved to carbonyl compounds. If the ozonide is cleaved in the presence of a reducing

agent such as zinc or dimethyl sulfide,the products will be ketones and/or aldehydes.

(The product will be a ketone if the carbon of the alkene is bonded to two carbon-

containing substituents; the product will be an aldehyde if at least one of the sub-

stituents bonded to the carbon is a hydrogen.) The reducing agent prevents

aldehydes from being oxidized to carboxylic acids. Cleaving the ozonide in the pres-

ence of zinc or dimethyl sulfide is referred to as 
Òworking up the ozonide under reduc-
ing conditions.ÓIf the ozonide is cleaved in the presence of an oxidizing agent such as hydrogen perox-
ide the products will be ketones and/or carboxylic acids. Carboxylic acids are

formed instead of aldehydes because any aldehyde that is initially formed will be im-

mediately oxidized to a carboxylic acid by hydrogen peroxide. Cleavage in the pres-

ence of is referred to as 
Òworking up the ozonide under oxidizing conditions.
ÓThe following reactions are examples of the oxidative cleavage of alkenes by
ozonolysis:OOHCH3CH2CHCHCH2CH31. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2OCH3CH2H1. O3, Ð78 C2. (CH3)2SCH3C2OCH3CH2CHCCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2HOCO1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2CH2CH3CH3COH2O2(H2O2),CRRRRCCRROHRHRCHRCozonidea ketonean aldehyde
OOZn, H2O or(CH3)2S H2O2 a ketonea carboxylic acidOOC
OOOoxidizingconditionsreducing
conditionssp2sp2OOTo determine the product of ozonolysis,
replace with 

If work-up is done under oxidizing 
conditions, convert any aldehyde
products to carboxylic acids.
OC.COCCRCROHCOROOOOozonidemolozonidemechanism for ozonide formationCRCRHRRCRRRCHCRCRHOOOOOO3-D Molecules:Ozone;
Molozonide;
OzonideBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 862
The one-carbon fragment obtained from the reaction of a terminal alkene with
ozone will be oxidized to formaldehyde if the ozonide is worked up under reducing

conditions and to formic acid if it is worked up under oxidizing conditions.
Only the side-chain double bond will be oxidized in the following reaction because
the stable benzene ring is oxidized only under prolonged exposure to ozone.
PROBLEM 22Give an example of an alkene that will form the same ozonolysis products,regardless of
whether the ozonide is worked up under reducing conditions or oxidizing

conditions PROBLEM 23Give the products that you would expect to obtain when the following compounds are

treated with ozone,followed by work-up with
a.b.
1.4.
2.5.
3.6.
Ozonolysis can be used to determine the structure of an unknown alkene. If you
know what carbonyl compounds are formed by ozonolysis,you can mentally work

backward to deduce the structure of the alkene. For example,if ozonolysis of an

alkene followed by a work-up under reducing conditions forms acetone and butanal as

products,you can conclude that the alkene was 2-methyl-2-hexene.
CH3CH3COOCHCH2CH2CH3CH3CCH3CHCH2CH2CH32-methyl-2-hexenealkene that underwentozonolysisozonolysis productsbutanalacetoneCH3CH3CH3CH2CH2CHCHCH
2CH2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CCHCH3CH3H2O2 :Zn, H2O:(H2O2).H2O)(Zn,OCOHCHOCH3CH2COHCHCH2CH31. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2COCOOHHHCOHOCOHHCH3CH2CH2CHCH21. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2OCH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH21. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2Section 20.8Oxidative Cleavage of Alkenes
863Tutorial:
Ozonolysis reactionsÑsynthesisBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 863
864CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsPROBLEM 24a.What alkene would give only acetone as a product of ozonolysis?
b.What alkenes would give only butanal as a product of ozonolysis?
PROBLEM 25SOLVED
The following products were obtained from ozonolysis of a diene followed by work-up
under reducing conditions. Give the structure of the diene.
SOLUTIONThe five-carbon dicarbonyl compound indicates that the diene must contain
five carbons flanked by two double bonds.
One of the carbonyl compounds obtained from ozonolysis has one carbon atom,and the
other has three carbon atoms. Therefore,one carbon has to be added to one end of the

diene,and three carbons have to be added to the other end.
PROBLEM 26What aspect of the structure of the alkene does ozonolysis not tell you?
Permanganate CleavageWe have seen that alkenes are oxidized to 1,2-diols by a basic solution of potassium
permanganate at room temperature or below,and the 1,2-diols can subsequently be

cleaved by periodic acid to form aldehydes and/or ketones (Sections20.6and 20.7). If,

however,the basic solution of potassium permanganate is heated or if the solution is

acidic,the reaction will not stop at the diol. Instead,the alkene will be cleaved,and the

reaction products will be ketones and carboxylic acids. If the reaction is carried out

under basic conditions,any carboxylic acid product will be in its basic form
if the reaction is carried out under acidic conditions,any carboxylic acid
product will be in its acidic form (RCOOH) (Section1.20). Terminal alkenes form
as a product.The various methods used to oxidize an alkene are summarized in Table20.1.
CH3CH2CCH3CHCH3CH2KMnO4, HOOKMnO4, HOCH3CH2CHCH
2KMnO4HCO2CO2CH3CH2CH3COOCOCH3CH3CH2HOOCCO2(RCOO);CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CHCHCH2CH3OOHCCH2CH2CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH2CHOOOO
HCCH2CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CHHCHA peroxyacid, and (cold basic)
break only the bond of the
alkene. Ozone and acidic (or hot basic)break both the bond and the
bond.SPKMnO4PKMnO4OsO4,BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 864
Section 20.8Oxidative Cleavage of Alkenes
865PROBLEM 27SOLVED
Describe how the following compound could be prepared,using the given starting materi-
als (perform a retrosynthetic analysis to help you arrive at your answer):
SOLUTIONRetrosynthetic analysis shows that the target molecule can be disconnected
to give a five-carbon positively charged fragment and a four-carbon negatively charged

fragment (Section18.12). Pentanal and a butyl magnesium bromide are the synthetic

equivalents for the two fragments. The five-carbon starting material can be converted to the

required four-carbon compound by ozonolysis.
Now the synthesis of pentanal and butyl magnesium bromide from the given starting
material can be written in the forward direction,including the reagents necessary for

the transformations.OH?Table 20.1Summary of the Methods Used to Oxidize an AlkeneOCH3CCH3OCH3CHCH3CH3CCHCH31. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2O CH3CH3COCHCH3RCOOHOOCH3CCH3OCH3COH1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2 OCH3CCH3OCH3COHKMnO4 HHIO4 OCH3CCH3OCH3COKMnO4, HO  CH3OHCH3COHCHCH3OCH3CCH3OCH3CHKMnO4, HO,H2O  coldHIO4 CH3OHCH3COHCHCH3OCH3CCH3OCH3CH1. OsO4 2. H2O2 OHOHOHOBrOHOBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 865
866CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsThe reaction of pentanal with butyl magnesium bromide forms the target compound.
PROBLEM 28a.How could you synthesize the following compound from starting materials containing
no more than four carbons? (Hint:A 1,6-diketone can be synthesized by oxidative
cleavage of a 1,2-disubstituted cyclohexene.)
b.How could you synthesize the same compound in two steps from starting materials con-
taining no more than six carbons?20.9Oxidative Cleavage of AlkynesThe same reagents that oxidize alkenes also oxidize alkynes. Alkynes are oxidized to
diketones by a basic solution of at room temperature and are cleaved by

ozonolysis to carboxylic acids. Ozonolysis requires neither oxidative nor reductive

work-up
Ñit is followed only by hydrolysis. Carbon dioxide is obtained from the CH
group of a terminal alkyne.
PROBLEM 29What is the structure of the alkyne that gives each of the following sets of products upon
ozonolysis followed by hydrolysis?
a.b.
2OOOHOOHHOCO2COOHOCH3CCCH
2CH3CH3COCCH2CH3KMnO4HOOCH3CCCH
2CH3CH3COHOCH3CH2COHCH3CH2CH2CCH
CO2OCH3CH2CH2COH1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2-pentyne2-pentyne1-pentyneKMnO4OOOHOOHO1. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2OH2Raney NiHBrBrMgEt2OMgBr1. BH3/THF2. HO, H2O2PCCOH3OMgBrOOHBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 866
Section 20.10Designing a Synthesis VIII: Functional Group Interconversion
86720.10Designing a Synthesis VIII:Functional Group Interconversion
Converting one functional group into another is called 
functional group interconver-
sion. Our knowledge of oxidation
Ðreduction reactions has greatly expanded our abili-
ty to carry out functional group interconversions. For example,an aldehyde can be

converted into a primary alcohol,an alkene,a secondary alcohol,a ketone,a car-

boxylic acid,an acyl chloride,an ester,an amide,or an amine.
A ketone can be converted into an ester or an alcohol.
Asthe number of reactions you learn grows,so will the number of functional group
interconversions you can perform. You will also find that you have more than one

route available when you design a synthesis. The route you actually decide to use will

depend on the availability and cost of the starting materials and on the ease with which

the reactions in the synthetic pathway can be carried out.
PROBLEM 30Add the necessary reagents over the reaction arrows.
a.b.
OHOHOHOHBrOHO1. LiAlH42. H3OOOOOHOHOHRCOOH1. NaBH42. H3OOOOHOHOH1. NaBH42. H3ONHCH31. LiAlH42. H2OOOHOOCH3ONHCH3H2SO4H2OH2SO4H2CrO4H2CrO4OClSOCl2CH3OHCH3NH2Tutorial:
Multistep synthesisTutorial:
Common terms: 
oxidationÐreduction reactions\BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 867
868CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsPROBLEM 31a.Show two ways to convert an alkyl halide into an alcohol that contains one additional
carbon atom.b.Show how a primary alkyl halide can be converted into an amine that contains one
additional carbon atom.c.Show how a primary alkyl halide can be converted into an amine that contains one less
carbon atom.PROBLEM 32Show how each of the following compounds could be synthesized from the given starting

material:a.b.c.d.PROBLEM 33How many different functional groups can you use to synthesize a primary alcohol?
20.11Biological OxidationÐReduction ReactionsBoth oxidation reactions and reduction reactions are important in living systems. An
example of an oxidation reaction that takes place in animal cells is the oxidation of

ethanol to acetaldehyde,a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.

Ingestion of a moderate amount of ethanol lowers inhibitions and causes a light-headed

feeling,but the physiological effects of acetaldehyde are not as pleasant. Acetaldehyde

is responsible for the feeling known as a hangover. (In Section25.4,we will see how

vitamin can help cure a hangover.)
The enzyme cannot oxidize ethanol to acetaldehyde unless an oxidizing agent is pre-
sent. Oxidizing agents used by organic chemists,such as chromate and permanganate

salts,are not present in living systems. (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide),the

most common oxidizing agent available in living systems,is used by cells to oxidize al-

cohols to aldehydes (Section25.2). Notice that is written with a positive charge

to reflect the positive charge on the nitrogen atom of the pyridine ring.
is reduced to NADH when it oxidizes a compound. NADH is used by the
cell as a reducing agent. When NADH reduces a compound,it is oxidized back to
which can then be used for another oxidation. Although and NADH are
complicated-looking molecules,the structural changes that occur when they act as ox-

idizing and reducing agents take place on a relatively small part of the molecule. The
NADNAD,NADNADNADOCH3CH2OHCH3CHNADNADHH
ethanolacetaldehyde
alcoholdehydrogenaseB1BrOOHBrOBrOBrOHOBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 868
Section 20.11Biological Oxidation
ÐReduction Reactions869rest of the molecule is used to bind or NADH to the proper site on the enzyme
that catalyzes the reaction.oxidizes a compound by accepting a hydride ion from it. In this way,the
number of carbon
Ðhydrogen bonds in the compound decreases (the compound is oxi-
dized) and the number of carbon
Ðhydrogen bonds in increases (is re-
duced). can accept a hydride ion at the 4-position of the pyridine ring because

the electrons can be delocalized onto the positively charged nitrogen atom. Although
could also accept a hydride ion at the 2-position,the hydride ion is always de-
livered to the 4-position in enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
NROCNH2NROCNH2ethanolNAD123456NADHacetaldehydeHHOHCH3HHHCH3HOCHCH3OHCNADNADNADNADNADNOCNH2HHa pyridine ringOHOPHOOHOHOOOOOPOOnicotinamide adenine dinucleotideNADNNNNNH2NOCNH2Oreduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotideNADHOHOPHOOHOHOOOOOPOONNNNNH2ONADcauses violently unpleasant effects when ethanol is consumed,
even when it is consumed a day or two after Antabuse
¨is taken.
TREATING ALCOHOLICS WITH
ANTABUSE
Disulfiram,most commonly known by one of its
trade names,Antabuse
¨,is used to treat alcoholics. The drug
OCH3CH2OHCH3CHethanolacetaldehyde
OCH3COHacetic acidalcoholdehydrogenasealdehydedehydrogenase3-D Molecules:NADHNAD;SSCCSSNNCH3CH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CH2CH3AntabuseAntabuse
¨inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase,the enzyme re-
sponsible for oxidizing acetaldehyde to acetic acid,resulting in a

buildup of acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde causes the unpleasant

physiological effects of intoxication:intense flushing,nausea,

dizziness,sweating,throbbing headaches,decreased blood pres-
sure,and,ultimately,shock. Consequently,Antabuse
¨should betaken only under strict medical supervision. In some people,

aldehyde dehydrogenase does not function properly. Their

symptoms in response to ingesting alcohol are nearly the same

as those of individuals who are medicated with Antabuse
¨.BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 869
870CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsNADH reduces a compound by donating a hydride ion from the 4-position of the
six-membered ring. Thus,NADH,and all act as reducing agents in

the same way
Ñthey donate a hydride ion.
CRRNROCNH2NADNROCNH2NADHHHOHCOOHRRHCRRHLiAlH4NaBH4,CH3OHmethanolOHCHNADHNADHformaldehydealcoholdehydrogenaseAN UNUSUAL ANTIDOTEAlcohol dehydrogenase,the enzyme that cat-
alyzes the oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde,catalyzes the oxidation of other alcohols as well. For example,

it catalyzes the oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde.Methanol itself is not harmful,but ingestion of methanol can
be fatal because formaldehyde is extremely toxic. The treat-
ment for methanol ingestion consists of giving the patient intra-
venous injections of ethanol. Alcohol dehydrogenase has 25

times the affinity for ethanol that it has for methanol. Thus,if

the enzyme can be kept loaded with ethanol,methanol will be

excreted before it has the opportunity to be oxidized.
FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME
The damage done to a human fetus when the

mother drinks alcohol during her pregnancy is
known as 
fetal alcohol syndrome
. It has been shown that the
harmful effects
Ñgrowth retardation,decreased mental func-
tioning,and facial and limb abnormalities
Ñare attributable 
to the acetaldehyde that is formed from the oxidation of

ethanol,which crosses the placenta and accumulates in the liver

of the fetus.20.12Oxidation of Hydroquinones
and Reduction of QuinonesHydroquinone,a 
para
-benzenediol,is easily oxidized to 
para
-benzoquinone. Al-though a wide variety of oxidizing agents can be used,Fremy
Õs salt (dipotassium ni-
trosodisulfonate) is the preferred oxidizing agent. The quinone can easily be reduced

back to hydroquinone.OOhydroquinonepara-benzoquinonea para-quinoneOHOHoxidationNaBH4(KSO3)2NOreductionBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 870
Section 20.12Oxidation of Hydroquinones and Reduction of Quinones
871Similarly,
ortho-benzenediols are oxidized to ortho-quinones.Overall,the oxidation reaction involves the loss of two hydrogen atoms and the re-
duction reaction involves the gain of two hydrogen atoms. In Section9.8,we saw that

phenols are used as radical inhibitors because of their ability to lose a hydrogen atom.Coenzyme Q (CoQ) is a quinone found in the cells of all aerobic organisms. It is
also called ubiquinone because it is ubiquitous (found everywhere) in nature.Its func-

tion is to carry electrons in the electron-transport chain. The oxidized form of CoQ ac-

cepts a pair of electrons from a biological reducing agent such as NADH and

ultimately transfers them to In this way,biological oxidizing agents are recycled:oxidizes a compound,
thereby forming NADH,which is oxidized back to by oxygen,via coenzyme

Q,which is unchanged in the overall reaction. Biological redox reagents and their re-

cycling are discussed further in Sections25.2and 25.3.
HNADNADSubstratereducedSubstrateoxidizedNADHNADHHO2H2O21NADNADO2.Ohydroquinonemechanism for hydroquinone oxidationÐquinone reductionOHOHsemiquinonepara-benzoquinoneOOHOHHOOortho-benzoquinonean ortho-quinoneOHOH(KSO3)2NONaBH4oxidationreduction
CH3RCH3OR  (CH2CHn  110CCH2)nHCH3OOOcoenzyme Qoxidized formOHOHHCH3RCH3OCH3OOHOHcoenzyme Qreduced formNADNADHCH3CH3RCH3OCH3OO2OOCH3RCH3OCH3OH2O213-D Molecules:Coenzyme Q (oxidized form);
Coenzyme Q (reduced form)BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 871
872CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction ReactionsSummaryTHE CHEMISTRY OF
PHOTOGRAPHYBlack-and-white photography depends on the fact
that hydroquinone is easily oxidized. Photographic film is cov-

ered by an emulsion of silver bromide. When light hits the film,

the silver bromide is sensitized. Sensitized silver bromide is a

better oxidizing agent than silver bromide that has not been ex-

posed to light. When the exposed film is put into a solution of

hydroquinone (a common photographic developer),hydro-
quinone is oxidized to quinone by sensitized silver ion and the
silver ion is reduced to silver metal,which remains in the emul-

sion. The exposed film is 
Òfixed
Óby washing away unsensitized
silver bromide with Black silver deposits are

left in regions where light has struck the film. This is the black,

opaque part of a photographic negative.
Na2S2O3H2O.Oxidationis coupled with reduction:A 
reducing agent
isoxidized and an oxidizing agentis reduced. For reactions in
which oxidation or reduction has taken place on carbon,if the

reaction increases the number of bonds or decreases

the number of or bonds (where X d

notes a halogen),the compound has been reduced; if the reac-

tion decreases the number of bonds or increases the

number of or bonds,the compound

has been oxidized. Similarly,the number of or 

bonds increases in reduction reactions,and the number of
or bonds increases in oxidation reactions. The
oxidation stateof a carbon atom equals the total number of
its and bonds.
An organic compound is reduced by the addition of by
one of three mechanisms:Catalytic hydrogenations
add two
hydrogen atoms,dissolving metal reductions
add two elec-
trons and two protons,and 
metal hydride reductions
involve
the addition of a hydride ion followed by a proton. Car-

bonÐcarbon,carbon
Ðnitrogen,and some carbon
Ðoxygen mul-tiple bonds can be reduced by catalytic hydrogenation. An

alkyne is reduced by sodium and liquid ammonia to a trans

alkene. is a stronger reducing agent than 
is used to reduce aldehydes,ketones,and acyl
halides; is used to reduce carboxylic acids,esters,and

amides. Replacing some of the hydrogens of with OR

groups decreases the reactivity of the metal hydride. Multiply

bonded carbon atoms cannot be reduced by metal hydrides.
LiAlH4LiAlH4NaBH4NaBH4.LiAlH4H2CXCN,CO,SONOSHNHCXCN,CO,CHCXCN,CO,CHPrimary alcohols are oxidized to carboxylic acids by
chromium-containing reagents and to aldehydes by PCC or
a Swern oxidation
. Secondary alcohols are oxidized to ke-
tones. Tollens reagent can oxidize only aldehydes. A

peroxyacid
oxidizes an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid,a ke-
tone to an ester (in a Baeyer
ÐVilliger oxidation
),and an
alkene to an epoxide. Alkenes are oxidized to 1,2-diols by

potassium permanganate in a cold basic solution

or by osmium tetroxide 1,2-Diols are oxidatively cleaved
to ketones and/or alde-
hydes by periodic acid Ozonolysis oxidatively

cleaves alkenes to ketones and/or aldehydes when worked

up under reducing conditions and to ketones and/or car-

boxylic acids when worked up under oxidizing conditions.

Acidic solutions and hot basic solutions of potassium per-

manganate also oxidatively cleave alkenes to ketones and/or

carboxylic acids.A chemoselective reaction
is a reaction in which areagent reacts with one functional group in preference to

another. An 
enantioselective reaction
forms more of one
enantiomer than of another. Converting one functional

group into another is called 
functional group intercon-
version
.and NADH are the most common redox reagents in
living systems. oxidizes a compound by accepting a

hydride ion from it; NADH reduces a compound by donating

a hydride ion to it.NADNAD(HIO4).(OsO4).(KMnO4)Summary of Reactions1.Catalytic hydrogenation of double and triple bonds (Section20.1).
a.b.
RCHH
2RCH2OHRaney NiORCRH
2RCHRRaney NiOOHRCHCHRH
2RCH2CH2RPt, Pd, or NiRCCR2 H
2RCH2CH2RPt, Pd, or NiRCHNRH
2RCH2NHRPt, Pd, or NiRCN2 H
2RCH2NH2Pt, Pd, or NiBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 872
Summary of Reactions873c.2.Reduction of alkynes to alkenes (Section20.1).
3.Reduction of carbonyl compounds with reagents that donate hydride ion (Section20.1).
a.e.
b.f.

c.g.

d.h.
4.Oxidation of alcohols (Section20.2).
RCHOprimary alcoholssecondary alcoholsRCH2OHH2CrO4Na2Cr2O7RCROH2SO4RCHORCHORCHROHRCRORCHROHRCH2OHRCH2OHPCCCH2Cl2furtheroxidationRCOHOOClCCClOO2. triethylamine, 60 C, 60 CCH3SCH3,OClCCClOO1. CH3SCH3,1. 2. triethylamine[]RCCl1. LiAl[OC(CH3)3]3H, 78 C2. H2OORCHORCOR1. [(CH3)2CHCH2]2AlH, 78 C2. H2OORCHOROHRCNHR1. LiAlH42. H2OORCH2NHRRCClRCH2OH1. NaBH42. H3OORCOR1. LiAlH42. H3OORCH2OHR
OHRCRRCHR1. NaBH42. H3OOOHRCOH1. LiAlH42. H3OORCH2OHRCHRCH2OH1. NaBH42. H3OOH2LindlarcatalystRCCR
CCHHRRNa or LiNH3 (liq)RCCR
CCHRRHRCClH
2RCHpartiallydeactivatedPdOOBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 873
874CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactions5.Oxidation of aldehydes and ketones (Section20.3).
a.aldehydesb.ketones6.Oxidation of alkenes (Sections20.4,20.6,20.8).
a.b.c.7.Oxidation of 1,2-diols (Section20.7).
8.Oxidation of alkynes (Section20.9).
a.c.
b.RCOHOORCOHCRRC2. H2O1. O3, 78 CRCOHOCO2CHRC2. H2O1. O3, 78 CRCOOCRCRRCHOKMnO4 RCRORCHCHROHIO4 OHOHRCRRCRORCHCHROHIO4 OHOHRCRCHRRCRCHRRRCOcoldKMnO4, HO, H2ORCRR
CHOOCHRHIO4 OHOHRCR2. H2O21. OsO4RCOOHORCRORCOHOKMnO4, HCHRRCRRCRORCHOCHRRCR1. O3, 78 C2. Zn, H2Oor(CH3)2SRCRORCOHO1. O3,78 C2. H2O2RCRORCORORÕCOOHORCOHORCHORCOHORÕCOOHORCOHORCHOmetallicsilverRCHO1. Ag2O, NH32. H3ONa2Cr2O7H2SO4RCOHORCOHAg
OBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 874
Problems8759.Oxidation of hydroquinones and reduction of quinones (Section20.12).
OOOHOH(KSO3)2NO NaBH4reductionoxidationKey Terms
Baeyer
ÐVilliger oxidation (p.853)
catalytic hydrogenation (p.844)

chemoselective reaction (p.848)

dissolving-metal reduction (p.846)

enantioselective reaction (p.857)

epoxidation (p.855)

functional group interconversion (p.867)

glycol (p.858)

metal-hydride reduction (p.846)
molozonide (p.862)
oxidation (p.842)

oxidationÐreduction reaction (p.841)
oxidation state (p.842)

oxidative cleavage (p.860)

oxidizing agent (p.841)

ozonide (p.862)

ozonolysis (p.861)

peroxyacid (p.853)
redox reaction (p.841)
reducing agent (p.841)

reduction (p.842)

Rosenmund reduction (p.845)

Swern oxidation (p.851)

Tollens test (p.853)

vicinal diol (p.858)

vicinal glycol (p.858)
Problems
34.Fill in the blank with 
ÒoxidizedÓor Òreduced.Óa.Secondary alcohols are _____to ketones.

b.Acyl halides are _____to aldehydes.

c.Aldehydes are _____to primary alcohols.

d.Alkenes are _____to aldehydes and/or ketones.

e.Aldehydes are _____to carboxylic acids.

f.Alkenes are _____to 1,2-diols.

g.Alkenes are _____to alkanes.
35.Give the products of the following reactions. Indicate whether each reaction is an oxidation or a reduction:
a.f.
b.g.
c.h.
d.i.
e.j.
CHOH2Raney NiCH3CH2CHCHCH
2CH31. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2OCCH3CHHCH3RCOOHOCH3CH2CCH
1. disiamylborane2. H2O2, HO, H2O3. LiAlH44. H3OCOCHCH3OCH31. LiAlH42. H3OH2partiallydeactivated PdCH3CH2CH2CClOCHORCOOHOCHCH
2HO, KMnO4 CH3CH2CH2CNHCH31. LiAlH42. H2OONa2Cr2O7H2SO4CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OHBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 875
876CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactionsk.o.
l.p.
m.q.

n.r.
36.How could each of the following compounds be converted to 
a.c.
b.d.
37.Identify A
ÐG:38.Identify the alkene that would give each of the following products upon ozonolysis followed by treatment with hydrogen perox
ide:39.Fill in each box with the appropriate reagent:
a.b.CH3CH2BrCH
3CH2CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CHO2.1.CH3CH2CHCH
3CH2CH2CH2OHCH2CH3CHCH
3COHCHCH3O2.1.f.C
OCHOCOOHCOOHOHOOOHOOOOHc.e.CCH3OHCOHOb.CH
3CCH2CH2CH2CH2CCH2CH3OOd.OCH3CH2COHOCH3CH2CH2COHa.OCH3CCH3OABCDEF
G1. CH3CCl2. H2OAlCl3O1. CH3MgBrHO2. H3O1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O2CH3CH2CHCH2CH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCH3CH2CH2CHOCH3CH2CH2COH ?O2. H2O21. O3, Ð78 CCH22. (CH3)2S1. O3, Ð78 CHO, KMnO4CHCHCH
3PtH2HO, coldKMnO4CH3CH2CH2CCCH
32. H2O1. O3, Ð78 C2. CH3MgBr3. H3O1. RCOOHONaNH3 (liq)CH3CH2CH2CCCH
3BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 876
Problems877c.40.Describe how 1-butyne can be converted into each of the following compounds:
a.b.
41.a.Give the products obtained from ozonolysis of each of the following compounds,followed by work-up under oxidizing
conditions:b.What compound would form the following products upon reaction with ozone,followed by work-up under reducing
conditions?42.Show how each of the following compounds can be prepared from cyclohexene:
a.c.
b.d.
43.The spectrum of the product obtained when an unknown alkene reacts with ozone and the ozonolysis product is worked
up under oxidizing conditions is shown. Identify the alkene.
4876
9103210
5(ppm)frequency1H NMRHOOHOOOOHOOHOHCH3HCCH2CH2CCH
OOOHHCH
HCOCOO1.2.3.4.5.
H3CHOHCH2CH3H3CCH
2CH3OHHBrOHOHOCCH2CH2CH2CH2COHOOBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 877
878CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactions44.Identify A
ÐN:45.Chromic acid oxidizes 2-propanol six times faster than it oxidizes 2-deuterio-2-propanol. Explain. (
Hint:See Section11.7.)
46.Fill in each box with the appropriate reagent:
47.Show how each of the following compounds could be prepared,using the given starting material:
a.d.
b.e.
c.48.Upon treatment with ozone followed by work-up with hydrogen peroxide,an alkene forms formic acid and a compound that shows
three signals (a singlet,a triplet,and a quartet) in its spectrum. Identify the alkene.
49.Which of the following compounds would be more rapidly cleaved by 
HHOHHOHOHHOHABHIO4 ?1H NMROHNHCH3OHOCCH2CH2CH2CH2CCH3OOCH3CH2CH2CH2OHCH
3CH2CH2CCH2CH3OHOCCH2CH2CH2CH2COHOOOCH3CH2CHOCH3CH2COCH2CH2CH3OCH3CCH3CHCH2CH2CCH31.2.OCH3CHCHCH2CH2CCH3CH3OOH1.2.1.2.CH3CHCCH2CH2CCH3CH3OOOCH3CH3CHHOCH
3CH3CH3CH1. CH3CClOAlCl32. H2O1. O3, Ð78 C2. H2O21. LiAlH42. H2OCH3lexcessK2CO3RCOOHOHClH2ONH3SOCl2Br2Ag2OABC
  DGHIJKNE  FL  MBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 878
Problems87950.Show how cyclohexylacetylene can be converted into each of the following compounds:
a.b.51.Show how the following compounds could be synthesized. The only carbon-containing reagents that are available for each
synthesis are shown.
a.c.
b.52.The catalytic hydrogenation of 0.5g of a hydrocarbon at 25
¡C consumed about 200mL of under 1atm of pressure. Reaction
of the hydrocarbon with ozone,followed by treatment with hydrogen peroxide gave one product,which was found to be a four-

carbon carboxylic acid. Identify the hydrocarbon.53.Tom Thumbs was asked to prepare the following compounds from the given starting materials. The reagents he chose to use for
each synthesis are shown.
a.Which of his syntheses were successful?

b.What products did he obtain from the other syntheses?

c.In his unsuccessful syntheses,what reagents should he have used to obtain the desired product?
1.2.3.54.The catalytic hydrogenation of compound A formed compound B. The IR spectrum of compound A and the spectrum of
compound B are shown. Identify the compounds.
2.52.62.72.82.933.5455.5678910111213141516
4.52200200018001600140012001000800600
240026002800300032003400360038004000Wavelength (m)Wave number (cm1)% Transmittance1H NMR1. RCOOH2. HOH3CCH
3OHH3COHCH3OCH3CH2COCH3CH3CH2CH2OHCH3OH1. NaBH42. H3OOCH3CH3CH2CKMnO4H2SO4CHCH3CH3OHOH
CH3CH2CCHCH3H2CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CHOHCH3CHOHCH3OOCH3CH2OHCH3CH2CH2CHCH2OHCH3CH3CH2CH2OHCH2COHOCOHOBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 879
880CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactions55.Diane Diol worked for several days to prepare the following compounds:
She labeled them carefully and went to lunch. To her horror,when she returned,she found that the labels had fallen off the bott
lesand onto the floor. Gladys Glycol,the student at the next bench,told her that the diols could be easily distinguished by two ex
peri-ments. All Diane had to do was determine which ones were optically active and how many products were obtained when each was

treated with periodic acid. Diane did what Gladys suggested and found the following to be true:
1.Compounds A,E,and F are optically active,and B,C,and D are optically inactive.
2.One product is obtained from the reaction of A,B,and D with periodic acid.

3.Two products are obtained from the reaction of F with periodic acid.

4.C and E do not react with periodic acid.
Will Diane be able to distinguish among the six diols and label them from A to F with only the preceding information? Label the
structures.56.Show how propyl propionate could be prepared,using allyl alcohol as the only source of carbon.

57.Compound A has a molecular formula of and is oxidized by an acidic solution of sodium dichromate to give compound B,
whose molecular formula is When compound A is heated with C and D are obtained. Considerably more D is

obtained than C. Compound C reacts with followed by treatment with to give two products:formic acid and compound

E,whose molecular formula is Compound D reacts with followed by treatment with to give compound F,

whose molecular formula is and compound G,whose molecular formula is What are the structures of

compounds A through G?
58.A compound forms 
cis-1,2-dimethycyclopropane when it is reduced with and The spectrum of the compound
shows only two singlets. What is the structure of the compound?
59.Show how you could convert
a.maleic acid to (2
R,3S)-tartaric acidc.maleic acid to (2
R,3R)- and (2S,3S)-tartaric acidb.fumaric acid to (2
R,3S)-tartaric acidd.fumaric acid to (2
R,3R)- and (2S,3S)-tartaric acid1H NMRPdC.H2C2H4O2.C3H6O,H2O2,O3,C4H8O.H2O2,O3,H2SO4,C5H10O.C5H12OCH3CH2OHHCH3OHHCH3CH2OHHCH3HHOCH3CH3OHOHHHCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3OHHHOHOHHHOHCH2CH3CH2CH3OHOHHH4876
9103210
5frequency(ppm)BRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 880
Problems88160.Identify A through O:
61.Show how the following compounds could be prepared,using only the indicated starting material as the source of carbon:
a.b.c.d.62.A primary alcohol can be oxidized only as far as the aldehyde stage if the alcohol is first treated with tosyl chloride (TsC
l) and theresulting tosylate is allowed to react with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Propose a mechanism for this reaction. (
Hint:SeeSection20.2.)
63.Identify the alkene that gives each of the following products upon ozonolysis,followed by treatment with dimethyl sulfide:
a.b.
64.Propose a mechanism to explain how dimethyl sulfoxide and oxalyl chloride react to form the dimethylchlorosulfonium ion used
as the oxidizing agent in the Swern oxidation.CH3CH3OSOCOCCl
ClCO2COCldimethyl sulfoxideCH3CH3ClSdimethylchloro-sulfonium ionoxalyl chlorideOHOOHCHOOOHOOOCH3CH2CH2CH2OHTsClpyridineCH3CH2CH2CH2OTsDMSOCH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH2CHfrom two molecules of ethane
OCH3CCHCH
3from propane and any molecule with two carbon atomsCH3OCH3CHCCH
3using propane as the only source of carbonCH3CH3CCH3fromOCH3CHCH3CH3Br2hHCH3CH2OHexcessCH3CH2NH2HOBr2H2CrO4H3OABH2CrO4C  DFE1. O3, Ð78 C2. Zn, H2O1. BH3/THF2. H2O2, HOISOCl2JCH3OHKLHBrMNH1. Mg, Et2O2. ethylene oxideOGCH3HOOCCOOH
HHCmaleic acidCHOOCH
HCOOH
Cfumaric acidCCOOHCHOH
CHOHCOOHtartaric acidBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 881
882CHAPTER 20M
ore About OxidationÐReduction Reactions65.Show how the following compounds could be prepared,using only the indicated starting material as the source of carbon:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
66.Terpineol is an optically active compound with one asymmetric carbon. It is used as an antiseptic. Reaction of terpineol
with forms an optically inactive compound Heating the reduced compound in acid followed by ozonolysis and

work-up under reducing conditions produces acetone and a compound whose and are shown. What is the

structure of terpineol?67.Propose a mechanism for the following enzyme-catalyzed reaction. (
Hint:Notice that Br is attached to the more substituted carbon.)CH3chloroperoxidaseBr, H2O2HOHO
CH3OCH3CCH3OCCH3CH3BrOHpregnenolone200180160140120806040200
100 (ppm)frequency2124876
9103210
5 (ppm)frequency2.32.2
2.4PPM13C NMR1H NMR(C10H20O).H2Pt(C10H18O)OHOHBrHOOCH2CH2OHOHOBrOHOOHBRUI20_841_882r3  01-04-2003  1:11 PM  Page 882
Aminesarecompounds in which one or
more of the hydrogens of ammonia 
have been replaced by an alkyl group.
Amines are among some of the most abundant

compounds in the biological world. We will ap-

preciate their importance in Chapter23,when we

look at amino acids and proteins; in Chapter24,

when we study how enzymes catalyze chemical reac-

tions; in Chapter25,when we investigate the ways in

which coenzymesÑcompounds derived from vitaminsÑhelp enzymes catalyze

chemical reactions; in Chapter27,when we study nucleic acids (DNA and RNA); and

in Chapter30,when we take a look at how drugs are discovered and designed.
Amines are also exceedingly important compounds to organic chemists,far too im-
portant to leave until the end of a course in organic chemistry. We have,therefore,al-

ready studied many aspects of amines and their chemistry. For example,we have seen

that the nitrogen in amines is hybridized and the lone pair resides in an empty 

orbital (Section2.8). We also have examined the physical properties of aminesÑtheir

hydrogen bonding properties,boiling points,and solubilities (Section2.9). In

Section2.7,we learned how amines are named. Most important,we have seen that the

lone-pair electrons of the nitrogen atom cause amines to react as bases,sharing their

lone pair with a proton,and as nucleophiles,sharing their lone pair with an atom other

than a proton.In this chapter,we will revisit some of these topics and look at some aspects of amines
and their chemistry that we have not discussed previously.
an amine is a base:an amine is a nucleophile:NH3BrHNH2RNH2BrCH3    RBrNH2RBrHCH3sp3sp3(NH3)21More About Amines ¥Heterocyclic Compounds883ethylaminepiperidinediethylaminetriethylamineCH3CH2NH2NHCH3CH2NHCH2CH3CH3CH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 883
884CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsSome amines are heterocyclic compounds
(or heterocycles
)Ñcyclic compounds
in which one or more of the atoms of the ring are heteroatoms. A 
heteroatom
is anatom other than carbon. The name comes from the Greek word 
heteros
,which means
Òdifferent.
ÓA variety of atoms,such as N,O,S,Se,P,Si,B,and As,can be incorpo-
rated into ring structures.Heterocycles are an extraordinarily important class of compounds,making up more
than half of all known organic compounds. Almost all the compounds we know as

drugs,most vitamins,and many other natural products are heterocycles. In this chapter,

we will consider the most prevalent heterocyclic compounds
Ñthe ones that contain theheteroatoms N,O,and S.
A natural product
is a compound synthesized by a plant or an animal. 
Alkaloidsare natural products that contain one or more nitrogen heteroatoms and are found in

the leaves,bark,roots,or seeds of plants. Examples include caffeine (found in tea

leaves,coffee beans,and cola nuts) and nicotine (found in tobacco leaves). Morphine

is an alkaloid obtained from opium,the juice derived from a species of poppy. Mor-

phine is 50 times stronger than aspirin as an analgesic,but it is addictive and suppress-

es respiration. Heroin is a synthetic compound that is made by acetylating morphine

(Section30.3).
Two other heterocycles are Valium
¨,a synthetic tranquilizer,and serotonin,a neuro-
transmitter. Serotonin is responsible for,among other things,the feeling of having had

enough to eat. When food is ingested,brain neurons are signaled to release serotonin. A

once widely used diet drug (actually a combination of two drugs,fenfluramine and

phentermine),popularly known as fen/phen,works by causing brain neurons to release

extra serotonin (Chapter16,p.622). After finding that many of those who took fenflu-

ramine had abnormal echocardiograms due to heart valve problems,the Food and Drug

Administration asked the manufacturer of these diet drugs to withdraw the products.

There is some evidence that faulty metabolism of serotonin plays a role in bipolar

affective disorder.
21.1More About Nomenclature
In Section2.7,we saw that amines are classified as primary,secondary,or tertiary,de-
pending on whether one,two,or three hydrogens of ammonia,respectively,have been

replaced by an alkyl group. We also saw that amines have both common and systemat-

ic names. Common names are obtained by citing the names of the alkyl subsitutents
HONCH3HHHOOCH3CCH3COONCH3HOHOOmorphineheroin
OONH3CNCH3NNCH3CH3CH2CH2NH2C6H5NClNOCH3NNHONHcaffeinenicotineValium
serotoninBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 884
Section 21.2Amine Inversion
885(in alphabetical order) that have replaced the hydrogens of ammonia. Systematic
names employ 
ÒamineÓas a functional group suffix.
A saturated cyclic amine
Ña cyclic amine without any double bonds
Ñcan benamed as a cycloalkane,using the prefix 
ÒazaÓto denote the nitrogen atom. There are,
however,other acceptable names. Some of the more commonly used names are shown

here. Notice that heterocyclic rings are numbered so that the heteroatom has the low-

est possible number.
Heterocycles with oxygen and sulfur heteroatoms are named similarly. The prefix for
oxygen is ÒoxaÓand that for sulfur is Òthia.ÓPROBLEM 1Name the following compounds:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
21.2Amine InversionThe lone-pair electrons on nitrogen allow an amine to turn 
Òinside outÓrapidly at room
temperature. This is called 
amine inversion
. One way to picture amine inversion is to
compare it to an umbrella that turns inside out in a windstorm.CH2CH3OCH3SNHCH2CH3CH3CH3OCH3HNHNCH3CH3OOOtetrahydropyran1,4-dioxane
oxacyclopropaneoxiraneethylene oxideOthiacyclopropanethiiraneSOOoxacyclobutaneoxetaneoxacyclopentanetetrahydrofurana tertiary amineethylmethylpropylamineN-ethyl-N-methyl-1-propanaminea secondary aminebutylethylamineN-ethyl-1-butanaminea primary aminepentylamine1-pentanaminecommon name:systematic name:CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2CH2NHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2NCH2CH3CH3CH3CH2CH3NHNHNCH33-methylazacyclopentane3-methylpyrrolidine2-methylazacyclohexane2-methylpiperidineazacyclopropaneaziridineazacyclobutaneazetidineN-ethylazacyclopentaneN-ethylpyrrolidineNHNHBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 885
886CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsThe lone pair is required for inversion:Quaternary ammonium ions
Ñions with four
bonds to nitrogen and hence no lone pairÑdo not invert.
Notice that amine inversion takes place through a transition state in which the 
nitrogen becomes an nitrogen. The three groups bonded to the nitrogen are

coplanar in the transition state with bond angles of 120¡,and the lone pair is in a 
por-bital. The Òinverted
Óand Ònon-inverted
Óamine molecules are enantiomers,but they
cannot be separated because amine inversion is rapid. The energy required for amine

inversion is approximately (or ),about twice the amount of ener-

gy required for rotation about a carbon
Ðcarbon single bond,but still low enough to
allow the enantiomers to interconvert rapidly at room temperature.
21.3More About the AcidÐBase Properties of Amines
Amines are the most common organic bases. We have seen that ammonium ions have
values of about 11 (Section1.17) and that anilinium ions have values of about
5 (Sections7.10and 16.5). The greater acidity of anilinium ions compared with am-

monium ions is due to the greater stability of their conjugate bases as a result of elec-

tron delocalization. Amines have very high values. For example,the of

methylamine is 40.Saturated heterocycles containing five or more atoms have physical and chemical
properties typical of acyclic compounds that contain the same heteroatom. For exam-

ple,pyrrolidine,piperidine,and morpholine are typical secondary amines,and

N-methylpyrrolidine and quinuclidine are typical tertiary amines. The conjugate acids
of these amines have values expected for ammonium ions. We have seen that the

basicity of amines allows them to be easily separated from other organic compounds

(Chapter1,Problems70 and 71).
PROBLEM 2Why is the of the conjugate acid of morpholine significantly lower than the of the
conjugate acid of piperidine?papapapapapapa25 kJmol6 kcalmolsp2sp2sp3R2NR1transition stateamine inversionR3NR2R3R1NR2R3R1sp3sp3sp2p orbitalà3-D Molecules:Aziridinium ion; Pyrrolidine;
Piperidine; MorpholinepKa    10.8CH3CH2CH2NH3pKa    40CH3NH2pKa    10.9CH3CH3NH2pKa    11.1CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH2NHpKa    4.58NH3pKa    5.07CH3NH3NHHNNNONpyrrolidinepKa    11.27the ammonium ions of:piperidine
pKa    11.12morpholinepKa    9.28N-methylpyrrolidinepKa    10.32quinuclidinepKa    11.38HHHH
HHCH3
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 886
Section 21.4Reactions of Amines
887PROBLEM 3a.Draw the structure of 3-quinuclidinone.
b.What is the approximate of its conjugate acid?

c.Which has a lower the conjugate acid of 3-bromoquinuclidine or the conjugate
acid of 3-chloroquinuclidine?21.4Reactions of AminesThe lone pair on the nitrogen of an amine causes it to be nucleophilic as well as basic.
We have seen amines act as nucleophiles in a number of different kinds of reactions:in

nucleophilic substitution reactionsÑreactions that alkylate
the amine (Section10.4)
Ñsuch asin nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions
Ñreactions that acylatethe amine(Sections17.8,17.9,and 17.10)
Ñfor example,
in nucleophilic addition
Ðelimination reactionsÑthe reactions of aldehydes and ke-
tones with primary amines to form imines and with secondary amines to form enam-

ines (Section18.6)
Ñsuch asand in conjugate addition reactions (Section18.13)
Ñfor instance,CH3CCH
3NHCH3CH3OCHCHCH3NCH3CH3CH3COCH2CHOONHNH2NCH2H2OcatalyticHcatalyticHbenzylaminepyrrolidinean iminean enamineH2ONCH2NHHNHan amidepiperidinean amidemethylamineOCCH3ONCCH3OÐOCCH3OCH3COClC2   CH
3NH2CH3NH3ClÐCH3CH2ONHCH3CCH3CH2Opa,paCH3CH2BrCH
3CH2NH2CH3CH3CH2NHCH3HBrBrÐCH3NH2methylamineethylmethylamine
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 887
888CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsWe have seen that primary arylamines react with nitrous acid to form stable arene-
diazonium salts (Section16.12). Arenediazonium salts are useful to synthetic chemists

because the diazonium group can be replaced by a wide variety of nucleophiles. This

reaction allows a wider variety of substituted benzenes to be prepared than can be pre-

pared solely from electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.Amines are much less reactive than other compounds with electron-withdrawing
groups bonded to hybridized carbons,such as alkyl halides,alcohols,and ethers.

The relative reactivities of an alkyl fluoride (the least reactive of the alkyl halides),an

alcohol,an ether,and an amine can be appreciated by comparing the values of the

conjugate acids of their leaving groups,recalling that the stronger the base,the weak-

er is its conjugate acid and the poorer the base is as a leaving group. The leaving group

of an amine is such a strong base that amines cannot undergo the substitution

and elimination reactions that alkyl halides undergo.
Protonation of the amino group makes it a weaker base and therefore a better leav-
ing group,but it still is not nearly as good a leaving group as a protonated alcohol. Re-

call that protonated ethanol is more than units more acidic than protonated

ethylamine.So,unlike the leaving group of a protonated alcohol,the leaving group of a protonated
amine cannot dissociate to form a carbocation or be replaced by a halide ion. Proto-

nated amino groups also cannot be displaced by strongly basic nucleophiles such as
because the base would react immediately with the acidic hydrogen,and proto-
nation would convert it into a poor nucleophile.
PROBLEM 4Why is it that a halide ion such as can react with a protonated primary alcohol,but
cannot react with a protonated primary amine?PROBLEM 5Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.catalyticHCCH3OCH3CH2CH2NH2BrCH3CH2NH3CH3CH2NH2H2OHOÐHOpKa     2.4CH3CH2OH2pKa    11.2CH3CH2NH313 pa(NH2)pasp3N2ClÐNH2NNuNCl
Nuan arenediazonium saltHClNaNO2mostreactiverelative reactivitiesstrongest acid,
weakest conjugate
baseweakest acid,
strongest conjugate
baseleast
reactiveRCH2FRCH
2OHRCH
2OCH3RCH2NH2HFH
2ORCH
2OHNH
3pKa    3.2p
Ka    15.7p
Ka    15.5p
Ka    36BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 888
Section 21.5Reactions of Quaternary Ammonium Hydroxides
889b.c.d.21.5Reactions of Quaternary
Ammonium Hydroxides
The leaving group of a 
quaternary ammonium
ion has about the same leaving ten-
dency as a protonated amino group,but it does not have an acidic hydrogen that would

protonate a basic reactant. A quaternary ammonium ion,therefore,can undergo a re-

action with a strong base. The reaction of a quaternary ammonium ion with hydroxide

ion is known as a 
Hofmann elimination reaction
. The leaving group in a Hofmann
elimination reaction is a tertiary amine. Because a tertiary amine is only a moderately

good leaving group,the reaction requires heat.
A Hofmann elimination reaction is an E2 reaction. Recall that an E2 reaction is aconcerted,one-step reaction
Ñthe proton and the tertiary amine are removed in the
same step (Section11.1). Very little substitution product is formed.
PROBLEM 6What is the difference between the reaction that occurs when isopropyltrimethylammoni-
um hydroxide is heated and the reaction that occurs when 2-bromopropane is treated with

hydroxide ion?The carbon to which the tertiary amine is attached is designated as the -carbon,so
the adjacent carbon,from which the proton is removed,is called the -carbon. (Recall

that E2 reactions are also called -elimination reactions,since elimination is initiated

by removing a proton from the -carbon; Section11.1.) If the quaternary ammonium

ion has more than one -carbon,the major alkene product is the one obtained by re-

moving a proton from the -carbon bonded to the greater number of hydrogens. In the

following reaction,the major alkene product is obtained by removing a hydrogen from
bbbbbamechanism of the Hofmann eliminationCH3CHCH
2CH3CHCH
2NCH3CH3HCH
3HONCH3H2OCH3CH3CH3CHCH
2CH3CH2CH2NCH3CH3CH3HONCH3H2OCH3CH3CCH3CH3CH2NHCH2CH3OcatalyticHNH21. HCl, NaNO22. H2O, Cu2O, Cu(NO3)2NHOCH3CCl2
August Wilhelm von Hofmann
(1818Ð1892)was born in Germany.
He first studied law and then

changed to chemistry. He founded the

German Chemical Society. Hofmann

taught at the Royal College of Chem-

istry in London for 20 years and then

returned to Germany to teach at the

University of Berlin. He was one of

the founders of the German dye in-

dustry. Married four timesÑhe was

left a widower three timesÑhe had

11 children.
In a Hofmann elimination reaction, the
hydrogen is removed from the -carbon

bonded to the most hydrogens.
BBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 889
890CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compoundsthe -carbon bonded to three hydrogens,and the minor alkene product results from
removing a hydrogen from the -carbon bonded to two hydrogens.
In the next reaction,the major alkene product comes from removing a hydrogen from
the -carbon bonded to two hydrogens,because the other -carbon is bonded to only

one hydrogen.PROBLEM 7What are the minor products in the preceding Hofmann elimination reaction?We saw that in an E2 reaction of an alkyl chloride,alkyl bromide,or alkyl iodide,a
hydrogen is removed from the -carbon bonded to the 
fewest
hydrogens (ZaitsevÕs
rule; Section11.2). Now we see that in an E2 reaction of a quaternary ammonium ion,
the hydrogen is removed from the -carbon bonded to the 
mosthydrogens (anti-Zaitsev elimination
).Why do alkyl halides follow Zaitsev
Õs rule,while quaternary amines violate the
rule? When hydroxide ion starts to remove a proton from the alkyl bromide,the bro-

mide ion immediately begins to depart and a transition state with an 
alkene-like
struc-ture results. The proton is removed from the -carbon bonded to the fewest hydrogens

in order to achieve the most stable alkene-like transition state.
When,however,hydroxide ion starts to remove a proton from a quaternary ammonium
ion,the leaving group does not immediately begin to leave,because a tertiary amine is

not as good a leaving group as or As a result,a partial negative charge

builds up on the carbon from which the proton is being removed. This gives the transi-

tion state a carbanion-like
structure rather than an alkene-like structure. By removing
a proton from the -carbon bonded to the most hydrogens,the most stable carbanion-

like transition state is achieved. (Recall from Section11.2that primary carbanions are

more stable than secondary carbanions,which are more stable than tertiary carban-

ions.) Steric factors in the Hofmann reaction also favor anti-Zaitsev elimination.
bI.Br,Cl,OHCH3CHCHCH
3more stableHBrOHCH3CH2CCH
2less stableZaitsev eliminationalkene-like transition stateHBrOHCH2CHCH2CH2CH3more stableHN(CH3)3OHCH3CHCHCH2CH3HN(CH3)3less stableanti-Zaitsev eliminationcarbanion-like transition statebbbpropeneisobutyldimethylamineCH3CH3CH3HOCH3CHCH2NCH2CH2CH3CH2H2OCHCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2N  -carbon  -carbon
bbbb  -carbon  -carbon
1-pentenemajor product2-penteneminor productCH3NCH3CH3HOCH3CHCHCH
2CH3CH3CHCH2CH2CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3trimethylamineCH3CH3NCH3H2OBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 890
Section 21.5Reactions of Quaternary Ammonium Hydroxides
891Because the Hofmann elimination reaction occurs in an anti-Zaitsev manner,anti-
Zaitsev elimination is also referred to as Hofmann elimination. We have previously

seen anti-Zaitsev elimination in the E2 reactions of alkyl fluorides as a result of fluo-

ride ion being a poorer leaving group than chloride,bromide,or iodide ions. As in a

Hofmann elimination reaction,the poor leaving group results in a carbanion-like tran-

sition state rather than an alkene-like transition state (Section11.2).
PROBLEM 8Give the major products of each of the following reactions:
a.c.
b.d.
For a quaternary ammonium ion to undergo an elimination reaction,the counterion
must be hydroxide ion because a strong base is needed to start the reaction by remov-

ing a proton from a -carbon. Since halide ions are weak bases,quaternary ammoni-

um halidescannot undergo a Hofmann elimination reaction. However,a quaternary
ammonium halidecan be converted into a quaternary ammonium 
hydroxide
by treat-
ing it with silver oxide and water. The silver halide precipitates,and the halide ion is

replaced by hydroxide ion. The compound can now undergo an elimination reaction.
The reaction of an amine with sufficient methyl iodide to convert the amine into a
quaternary ammonium iodide is called 
exhaustive methylation
. (See Chapter10,
Problem8.) The reaction is carried out in a basic solution of potassium carbonate,so

the amines will be predominantly in their basic forms.The Hofmann elimination reaction was used by early organic chemists as the last
step of a process known as a Hofmann degradation
Ña method used to identify
amines. In a 
Hofmann degradation
,an amine is exhaustively methylated with methyl
iodide,treated with silver oxide to convert the quaternary ammonium iodide to a qua-

ternary ammonium hydroxide,and then heated to allow it to undergo a Hofmann elim-

ination. Once the alkene is identified,working backwards gives the structure of the

amine.excessK2CO3exhaustive methylationCH3CH2CH2NH2CH3CH3ICH3CH2CH2NCH3CH3IIAg2OHORR2 RNR
RR2 RNR
2 AgIH2ObNHO
H3CH3CCH3NHO
H3CCH
3CH3HOH3CN(CH3)3CH3HOCH3CH2CH2NCH3CH3BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 891
892CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsA USEFUL BAD-TASTING
COMPOUNDSeveral practical uses have been found for Bitrex
¨,a quaternary ammonium salt,because it is one of the most

bitter-tasting substances known and is nontoxic. Bitrex
¨is put
on bait to encourage deer to look elsewhere for their food,it is

put on the backs of animals to keep them from biting one

another,it is put on children
ÕsÕfingers to persuade them to
stop sucking their thumbs or biting their fingernails,and it is
added to toxic substances to keep them from being ingested
accidentally.
BitrexONHCCH2CH2CH3CH2CH3CH3CH3OCOCH2NPROBLEM 9Identify the amine in each case.a.4-Methyl-2-pentene is obtained from the Hofmann degradation of a primary amine.
b.2-Methyl-1-3-butadiene is obtained from two successive Hofmann degradations of a
secondary amine.PROBLEM 10SOLVED
Describe a synthesis for each of the following compounds,using the given starting mater-
ial and any necessary reagents:
a.b.c.SOLUTION TO 10a
Although an amine cannot undergo an elimination reaction,a qua-
ternary ammonium hydroxide can. The amine,therefore,must first be converted into a

quaternary ammonium hydroxide. Reaction with excess methyl iodide converts the amine

into a quaternary ammonium iodide,and treatment with aqueous silver oxide forms the

quaternary ammonium hydroxide. Heat is required for the elimination reaction.21.6Phase Transfer Catalysis
A problem organic chemists face in the laboratory is finding a solvent that will dis-
solve all the reactants needed for a given reaction. For example,if we want cyanide ion

to react with 1-bromohexane,we encounter a problem:Sodium cyanide is an ionic

compound that is soluble only in water,whereas the alkyl halide is insoluble in water.

Therefore,if we mix an aqueous solution of sodium cyanide with a solution of 1-bro-

mohexane in a nonpolar solvent,there will be two distinct phases
Ñan aqueous phaseand an organic phase
Ñbecause the solutions are immiscible. How,then,can sodium
cyanide react with the alkyl halide?
NHCH2CHCHCH
2BrCH3CH2CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CHCH
2CH3CH2CHCH
2H2OCH3CH2CH2CH2NH2CH3CH2CH2CH2N(CH3)3CH3IexcessAg
2OH2OICH3CH2CH2CH2N(CH3)3HOK2CO3BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 892
Section 21.6Phase Transfer Catalysis
893The two compounds will be able to react with each other if a catalytic amount of a
phase transfer catalystis added to the reaction mixture.Quaternary ammonium salts are the most common phase transfer catalysts. How-
ever,we saw in Section12.9that crown ethers can also be used as phase transfer

catalysts.How does the addition of a phase transfer catalyst allow the reaction of cyanide ion
with 1-bromohexane to take place? Because of its nonpolar alkyl groups,the quater-

nary ammonium salt is soluble in nonpolar solvents,but because of its charge,it is also

soluble in water. This means that the quaternary ammonium salt can act as a mediator

between the two immiscible phases. When a phase transfer catalyst such as tetrabutyl-

ammonium hydrogen sulfate passes into the nonpolar,organic phase,it must carry a

counterion with it to balance its positive charge. The counterion can be either its orig-

inal counterion (hydrogen sulfate) or another ion that is present in the solution (in the

reaction under discussion,it will be cyanide ion). Because there is more cyanide ion

than hydrogen sulfate ion in the aqueous phase,cyanide ion will more often be the ac-

companying ion. Once in the organic phase,cyanide ion can react with the alkyl

halide. (When hydrogen sulfate is transported into the oganic phase,it is unreactive

because it is both a weak base and a poor nucleophile.) The quaternary ammonium ion

will pass back into the aqueous phase carrying with it either hydrogen sulfate or bro-

mide ion as a counterion. The reaction continues with the phase transfer catalyst shut-

tling back and forth between the two phases. 
Phase transfer catalysishas beensuccessfully used in a wide variety of organic reactions.
startingmaterialtargetcompoundCNR4NRBrR
NCNCR4NNaHSO
4BrR4NBrR4Norganic phaseaqueousphaseCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCN1-bromohexane?BrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CNCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2BrCNR4N HSO4phase transfercatalystBrCH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CNtetrabutylammoniumhydrogen sulfatephase transfer catalystsCH3CH2CH2CH2NCH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3HSO4hexadecyltrimethylammoniumhydrogen sulfateCH3(CH2)14CH2NCH3CH3CH3HSO4benzyltriethylammoniumhydrogen sulfateCH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3HSO4BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 893
894CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compounds21.7Oxidation of Amines; The Cope Elimination ReactionAmines are easily oxidized,sometimes just by being exposed to air. Amines,there-
fore,are stored as salts (e.g.,as amine hydrochlorides),and drugs that contain amino

groups are often sold as salts.Primary amines are oxidized to hydroxlyamines,which in turn are oxidized to ni-
troso compounds,which are oxidized to nitro compounds. Hydrogen peroxide,peroxy-

acids,and other common oxidizing agents are used to oxidize amines. The oxidation

reactions generally take place by mechanisms that involve radicals,so they are not well

characterized.Secondary amines are oxidized to secondary hydroxylamines,and tertiary amines are
oxidized to amine oxides.Amine oxides undergo a reaction similar to the Hofmann elimination reaction,
called a Cope elimination reaction
. In a Cope elimination reaction
,a tertiary amine
oxide rather than a quaternary ammonium ion undergoes elimination. The Cope elim-

ination reaction occurs under milder conditions than does a Hofmann elimination
reaction.A strong base is not needed for a Cope elimination because the amine oxide acts as its
own base. The Cope elimination,therefore,is an intramolecular E2 reaction and in-

volves syn elimination.
CH3CH3CHCH
2CH3OHNNCH2CH3CH3mechanism of the Cope elimination reactionCH3CHHOa tertiary amine oxidea hydroxylamine
CH3OHCH3OCH3CHCH
2NCH3CH3CH2CH2NCH3Arthur C. Cope (1909Ð1966)wasborn in Indiana. He received a Ph.D.

from the University of Wisconsin and

was a professor of chemistry at Bryn

Mawr College,Columbia University,

and MIT.
NH2RNHOH
RNORNOORa nitro compounda nitroso compounda hydroxylaminea primary amineoxidationoxidationoxidationRRRNRRROHNRRRONHOOHH
2OHO
an tertiary amine oxidea tertiary amineRRNHRROHNHRROHNHOOHH
2OHO
a secondary hydroxylaminea secondary amineBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 894
Section 21.8Synthesis of Amines
895The major product of the Cope elimination,like that of the Hofmann elimination,is
the one obtained by removing a hydrogen from the -carbon bonded to the greater

number of hydrogens.PROBLEM 11Does the Cope elimination have an alkene-like transition state or a carbanion-like transi-
tion state?PROBLEM 12Give the products that would be obtained by treating the following tertiary amines with hy-

drogen peroxide followed by heat:
a.c.
b.d.
21.8Synthesis of AminesBecause ammonia and amines are good nucleophiles,they readily undergo reac-
tions with alkyl halides. (X denotes a halogen.)
Although these reactions can be used to synthesize amines,the yields are poor be-
cause it is difficult to stop the reaction after a single alkylation since ammonia and pri-

mary,secondary,and tertiary amines have similar reactivities.
A much better way to prepare a primary amine is by means of a Gabriel synthesis
(Section17.17). This reaction involves alkylating phthalimide and then hydrolyzing

the N-substituted phthalimide.SN2SN2CH3CH3NCH3NCH2CH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2NCH2CHCH3CH3CH3NCH2CH2CH3CH3OHOCH2CH2NCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2NCH2CH2CH3CH3bIn a Cope elimination, the hydrogen is
removed from the -carbon bonded to

the most hydrogens.
BNH3RCH2RCH2a primary amineRCH2XRCH2XRCH2XRCH2XNH2RCH2NHNH3RCH2RCH2RCH2NH2RCH2RCH2RCH2RCH2RCH2NHRCH2NRCH2RCH2RCH2CH2RNHXa secondary amineHXa tertiary aminea quaternaryammonium saltHXBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 895
896CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsPrimary amines also can be prepared in good yields if azide ion is used as the
nucleophile in an reaction. The product of the reaction is an alkyl azide,which

can be reduced to a primary amine. (See Chapter10,Problem9.)
Other reduction reactions also result in the formation of primary amines. For exam-
ple,the catalytic reduction of a nitrile forms a primary amine. (Recall that a nitrile can

be obtained from the reaction of cyanide ion with an alkyl halide.)
Amines are obtained from the reduction of amides with (Sections 18.5 and
20.1). This method can be used to synthesize primary,secondary,and tertiary amines.

The class of amine obtained depends on the number of substituents on the nitrogen

atom of the amide.A primary amine can be obtained from the reaction of an aldehyde or a ketone with
excess ammonia in the presence of and Raney nickel. Because the imine does not

have a substituent other than a hydrogen bonded to the nitrogen,it is relatively unsta-

ble,so the amine is obtained by adding to the bond as it is formed. This is

called reductive amination
.Secondary and tertiary amines can be prepared from imines and enamines by reducing
the imine or enamine. Sodium triacetoxyborohydride is a commonly used reducing

agent for this reaction.H2Pd/CONH
3CNH
CH3CH2CH3CH2CHNH2CH3CH2CCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2excessunstableCNH2H2CRCH
2NH2RNH
2O1. LiAlH42. H2Oa primary amineCRCH
2NHCH3RNHCH
3O1. LiAlH42. H2Oa secondary amineCRCH
2NCH3RNCH
3CH3O1. LiAlH42. H2Oa tertiary amineCH3LiAlH4SN2(N3)NHa protonated primary amineGabriel synthesis1. HOH3O2. CH3CH2Br   BrphthalimideOONCH
2CH3CH3CH2NH3COOHCOOHOOCH3CH2CH2CH2Brbutyl bromideCH3CH2CH2CH2NNbutyl azideCH3CH2CH2CH2NH2butylamineN3H2Pd/CNCH3CH2CH2CH2Brbutyl bromideCH3CH2CH2CH2CNpentanenitrileCH3CH2CH2CH2NH2pentylamineNaCHClNH2Pd/CBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 896
Section 21.9Aromatic Five-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
897A primary amine is obtained from the reduction of a nitroalkane,and an arylamine is
obtained from the reduction of nitrobenzene.PROBLEM 13Excess ammonia must be used when a primary amine is synthesized by reductive amina-
tion. What product will be obtained if the reaction is carried out with an excess of the car-

bonyl compound instead?
21.9Aromatic Five-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
Pyrrole, Furan, and Thiophene
Pyrrole
,furan,and 
thiopheneare five-membered-ring heterocycles. Each has three
pairs of delocalized electrons:Two of the pairs are shown as bonds,and one pair

is shown as a lone pair on the heteroatom. Furan and thiophene have a second lone pair

that is not part of the cloud. These electrons are in an orbital perpendicular to the

porbitals. Pyrrole,furan,and thiophene are aromatic because they are cyclic and pla-
nar,every carbon in the ring has a 
porbital,and the cloud contains 
three
pairs of electrons (Sections15.1and 15.3).
NHOSpyrrolefuranthiophene
ppsp2pppNO2NH2H2Pd/Cnitrobenzeneaniline
CH3CH2NO2CH3CH2NH2H2Pd/Cnitroethaneethylamine
OCHCH
3CH2NH2OCHCH
2NHCH2CH3NCH2CH3NaBH(OCCH3)3catalyticHcatalyticHONaBH(OCCH3)3CH3NHCH3CH3CH3ONCH3CH3Nan iminean enamineNHOorbital structure of pyrroletheseelectrons
are part of
the    cloudtheseelectrons
are part of
the    cloudorbital structure of furantheseelectrons are
in an sp2 orbitalperpendicular
to the p orbitals3-D Molecules:Pyrrole;
Furan;
ThiopheneBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:46 PM  Page 897
Pyrrole is an extremely weak base because the electrons shown as a lone pair are
part of the cloud. Therefore,when pyrrole is protonated,its aromaticity is destroyed.

Consequently,the conjugate acid of pyrrole is a very strong acid that

is,it has a strong tendency to lose a proton.
The resonance contributors of pyrrole show that nitrogen donates the electrons de-
picted as a lone pair into the five-membered ring.
PyrrolidineÑa saturated five-membered-ring heterocyclic amine
Ñhas a dipole mo-ment of 1.57D because the nitrogen atom is electron withdrawing. Pyrrole
Ñan unsat-
urated five-membered-ring heterocyclic amine
Ñhas a slightly larger dipole moment
(1.80D),but as we see from the electrostatic potential maps,the two dipole moments

are in opposite directions. (The red areas are on opposite sides of the two molecules.)

Apparently,the ability of pyrrole
Õs nitrogen to donate electrons into the ring by reso-
nance more than makes up for its inductive electron withdrawal (Section16.3).
In Section7.6,we saw that the more stable and more nearly equivalent the res-
onance contributors,the greater is the resonance energy. The resonance energies of

pyrrole,furan,and thiophene are not as great as the resonance energies of benzene and

the cyclopentadienyl anion,compounds for which the resonance contributors are all

equivalent. Thiophene,with the least electronegative heteroatom,has the greatest

resonance energy of these five-membered heterocycles; and furan,with the most elec-

tronegative heteroatom,has the smallest resonance energy.
Because pyrrole,furan,and thiophene are aromatic,they undergo electrophilic aro-
matic substitution reactions.slowfast
mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitutionYHYHNNYNHHHrelative resonance energies of some aromatic compoundsSNHO
HNHN    1.57 D    1.80 DNHHH
NHNHNNHNresonance contributors of pyrroleresonance hybridpa3.8;ppyrrolepyrrolidine898CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsPyrrole, furan, and thiophene undergo
electrophilic substitution preferentially

at C-2.BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 898
Section 21.9Aromatic Five-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
899Substitution occurs preferentially at C-2 because the intermediate obtained by at-
taching a substituent at this position is more stable than the intermediate obtained by

attaching a substituent at C-3 (Figure 21.1). Both intermediates have a relatively stable

resonance contributor in which all the atoms (except H) have complete octets. The

intermediate resulting from C-2 substitution of pyrrole has 
twoadditional resonancecontributors,each with a positive charge on a 
secondary allyliccarbon. The intermedi-
ate resulting from C-3 substitution,however,has only 
oneadditional resonancecontributor,which has a positive charge on a 
secondarycarbon. This resonance con-
tributor is further destabilized by being adjacent to an electron-withdrawing nitrogen

atom,so its predicted stability is less than that of a resonance contributor with a positive

charge on a secondary allylic carbon. If both positions adjacent to the heteroatom are

occupied,electrophilic substitution will take place at C-3.
Pyrrole,furan,and thiophene are all more reactive than benzene toward elec-
trophilic substitution because they are better able to stabilize the positive charge on the

carbocation intermediate,since the lone pair on the hetereoatom can donate electrons

into the ring by resonance (Figure21.1).
Furan is not as reactive as pyrrole in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.
The oxygen of furan is more electronegative than the nitrogen of pyrrole,so the oxy-

gen is not as effective as nitrogen in stabilizing the carbocation. Thiophene is less

reactive than furan toward electrophilic substitution because sulfur
Õs electrons are in
a 3porbital,which overlaps less effectively than the 2
porbital of nitrogen or oxygen
with the 2
porbital of carbon. The electrostatic potential maps illustrate the different
electron densities of the three rings.prelative reactivity toward electrophilic aromatic substitutionSNHOpyrrolefuranthiophenebenzene
H3CH3COBr2BrOHBr3-bromo-2,5-dimethylfuranCH3CH3CH3BrCH3OBr2OHBrO2NHNO3NH2O2-bromofuran2-methyl-5-nitropyrroleHNH(CH3CO)2O2-positionY3-positionHYHYHNHNHNHNHNHNYYYHHHFigure 21.1
Structures of the intermediates thatcan be formed from the reaction of
an electrophile with pyrrole at C-2
and C-3.thiophenefuranpyrrolePyrrole, furan, and thiophene are more
reactive than benzene toward elec-

trophilic aromatic substitution.
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 899
900CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsThe relative reactivities of the five-membered-ring heterocycles are reflected in the
Lewis acid required to catalyze a Friedel
ÐCrafts acylation reaction (Section15.13).
Benzene requires a relatively strong Lewis acid. Thiophene is more reactive

than benzene,so it can undergo a Friedel
ÐCrafts reaction using a weaker Lewis
acid. An even weaker Lewis acid,can be used when the substrate is furan. Pyr-

role is so reactive that an anhydride is used instead of a more reactive acyl chloride,

and no catalyst is necessary.
The resonance hybrid of pyrrole indicates that there is a partial positive charge on
the nitrogen. Therefore,pyrrole is protonated on C-2 rather than on nitrogen. Remem-

ber,a proton is an electrophile and,like other electrophiles,attaches to the C-2 posi-

tion of pyrrole.
Pyrrole is unstable in strongly acidic solutions because once protonated,it can readily
polymerize.Pyrrole is more acidic than the analogous saturated amine
because the nitrogen in pyrrole is hybridized and is,therefore,
more electronegative than the nitrogen of a saturated amine (Table21.1). Pyrrole
Õsacidity also is increased as a result of its conjugate base being stabilized by electron
sp3sp2pa36,pa17NHNHNHNHHHHHpolymerHNHNHHpKa   3.8HHCCH3OCCH3ONHNHCH3COCCH3OCH3COHOOOCH3CClOOHCl2-acetylpyrrole2-acetylfuran1. BF32. H2O1. SnCl42. H2OCCH3OSCH3CClOSHCl1. AlCl32. H2OOCH3CClHClOCCH32-acetylthiophenephenylethanoneBF3,SnCl4,AlCl3,BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 900
Section 21.9Aromatic Five-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
901delocalization. (Recall that the more stable the base,the stronger is its conjugate acid;
Section1.17).
PROBLEM 14When pyrrole is added to a dilute solution of in 2-deuteriopyrrole is formed.
Propose a mechanism to account for the formation of this compound.PROBLEM 15Use resonance contributors to explain why pyrrole is protonated on C-2 rather than on

nitrogen.PROBLEM 16Explain why pyrrole is less acidic than cyclopentadiene even

though nitrogen is considerably more electronegative than carbon.
Indole, Benzofuran, and BenzothiopheneIndole,benzofuran,and benzothiophene contain a five-membered aromatic ring fused
to a benzene ring. The rings are numbered in a way that gives the heteroatom the low-

est possible number. Indole,benzofuran,and benzothiophene are aromatic because

they are cyclic and planar,every carbon in the ring has a 
porbital,and the cloud of
each compound contains five
pairs of electrons (Section15.1). Notice that the elec-
trons shown as a lone pair on the indole nitrogen are part of the cloud; therefore,the

conjugate acid of indole,like the conjugate acid of pyrrole,is a strong acid
In other words,indole is an extremely weak base.
NHOS1234567indolebenzofuranbenzothiophene
pa2.4.ppppa15,pa17D2O,D2SO4NHNHHNHNpKa    ~17pKa    ~36NHNHNHNHNHNHNHNHHNNNNHHNHHNHHHHNNH
HNNH
pKa  5.16pKa  4.85pKa  2.5pKa  1.0pKa  2.4pKa  11.1p
Ka  17pKa  3.8pKa  8.0p
Ka  14.4pKa  6.8p
Ka  36TABLE 21.1
The pKa Values of Several Nitrogen Heterocycles
3-D Molecules:Indole;
Benzofuran; 
BenzothiopheneTutorial:
Basic sites of nitrogen
heterocyclesBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 901
21.10Aromatic Six-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
PyridineWhen one of the carbons of a benzene ring is replaced by a nitrogen,the resulting
compound is called pyridine.The pyridiniumion is a stronger acid than a typical ammonium ion because the
acidic hydrogen of a pyridinium ion is attached to an hybridized nitrogen,which is

more electronegative than an hybridized nitrogen (Section6.9).
Pyridine is a tertiary amine,so it undergoes reactions characteristic of tertiary amines.
For example,pyridine undergoes reactions with alkyl halides (Section10.4),and it

reacts with hydrogen peroxide to form an N-oxide (Section21.7).
PROBLEM 17SOLVED
Will an amide be formed from the reaction of an acyl chloride with an aqueous solution of
pyridine? Explain your answer.
NCH3INCH3INHOOH
NOHHO
N
OH2OpKa    0.79N-methylpyridinium iodidepyridine-N-oxideSN2HNNHHHNHNHpyridinium ionpyridinepiperidinium ionpiperidinepKa    5.16pKa    11.12sp2sp3sp3sp2NNorbital structure of pyridinepyridinetheseelectrons are
in an sp2 orbitalperpendicular
to the p orbitals431265902CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsTutorial:
Lone-pair electrons on 
nitrogen heterocycles3-D Molecule:PyridineBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 902
benzenepyridineSection 21.10Aromatic Six-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
903SOLUTIONAn amide will notbe formed because the positively charged nitrogen caus-
es pyridine to be an excellent leaving group. Therefore,the final product of the reaction

will be a carboxylic acid. (If the final pH of the solution is greater than the of the car-

boxylic acid,the carboxylic acid will be predominantly in its basic form.)
Pyridineis aromatic. Like benzene,it has two uncharged resonance contributors.
Because of the electron-withdrawing nitrogen,it also has three charged resonance

contributors that benzene does not have.
The dipole moment of pyridine is 1.57D. As the resonance contributors and the elec-
trostatic potential map indicate,the electron-withdrawing nitrogen is the negative end

of the dipole.Because it is aromatic,pyridine (like benzene) undergoes electrophilic aromatic
substitution reactions (is any base in the solution).
Electrophilic aromatic substitution of pyridine takes place at C-3 because the most sta-
ble intermediate is obtained by placing an electrophilic substituent at that position

(Figure21.2). When the substituent is placed at C-2 or C-4,one of the resulting reso-

nance contributors is particularly unstable because its nitrogen atom has an incomplete

octet anda positive charge.The electron-withdrawing nitrogen atom makes the inter-
mediate obtained from electrophilic aromatic substitution of pyridine less stable than

the carbocation intermediate obtained from electrophilic aromatic substitution of ben-
zene. Pyridine,therefore,is less reactive than benzene. Indeed,it is even less reactive

than nitrobenzene. (Recall from Section16.3that an electron-withdrawing nitro group

strongly deactivates a benzene ring toward electrophilic aromatic substitution.)
NO2Nrelative reactivity toward electrophilic aromatic substitutionNO2NO2NNNslowfast
mechanism for electrophilic aromatic substitutionYHBYBHYBN    1.57 DNNNNN
resonance contributors of pyridineH2ONRCClORCN
ORCOONpaPyridine undergoes electrophilic 
aromatic substitution at C-3.
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 903
904CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsNHYHYHY2-positionleast stableleast stableNNNHYHYHYNNNNYHYHYHNN4-position3-positionYFigure 21.2
Structures of the intermediates thatcan be formed from the reaction of
an electrophile with pyridine.Pyridine,therefore,undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions only under
vigorous conditions,and the yields of these reactions are often quite low. If the nitrogen

becomes protonated under the reaction conditions,the reactivity is further decreased be-

cause a positively charged nitrogen is more electron withdrawing than a neutral nitrogen.
We have seen that highly deactivated benzene rings do not undergo Friedel
ÐCraftsalkylation or acylation reactions. Therefore,pyridine,whose reactivity is similar to

that of a highly deactivated benzene,does not undergo these reactions either.
PROBLEM 18Give the product of the following reaction:
Since pyridine is 
lessreactive than benzene toward 
electrophilic
aromatic substitu-tion,it is not surprising that pyridine is 
more
reactive than benzene toward 
nucleophili-caromatic substitution. The electron-withdrawing nitrogen atom that destabilizes the
intermediate in electrophilic aromatic substitution stabilizes it in nucleophilic aromat-
ic substitution.CH3OHCH3CClONAlCl3no electrophilic aromatic substitution reactionNCH3CH2ClNNBr3-bromopyridine30%300 CFeBr3H2SO4Br2HBrNNSO3Hpyridine-3-sulfonic acid71%230 C300 CH2SO4H2ONNNO23-nitropyridine22%HNO3H2OBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 904
If the leaving groups at C-2 and C-4 are different,the incoming nucleophile will
preferentially substitute for the weaker base (the better leaving group).
PROBLEM 19Compare the mechanisms of the following reactions:
PROBLEM 20a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
b.What other product is formed?
NONHKOH/H2ONH2NClClNNH2NH2ClClNH2NBrNH2OCH3N
NH2BrOCH3N
CH3CH3OClNCH3ClOCH3N2-positionmost stablemost stableNNNNNNNNN4-position3-positionYHYHYYHHYHYYHHYHYYHFigure 21.3
Structures of the intermediates thatcan be formed from the reaction of
a nucleophile with pyridine.Section 21.10Aromatic Six-Membered-Ring Heterocycles
905Nucleophilic aromatic substitution of pyridine takes place at C-2 and C-4,because at-
tack at these positions leads to the most stable intermediate. Only when nucleophilic

attack occurs at these positions is a resonance contributor obtained that has the greatest

electron density on nitrogen,the most electronegative of the ring atoms (Figure21.3).
slowmechanism for nucleophilic aromatic substitutionfastYNZZNYNZYPyridine undergoes nucleophilicaromatic substitution at C-2 and C-4.
Pyridine is lessreactive than benzene to-
ward electrophilic aromatic substitution

and morereactive than benzene toward
nucleophilic aromatic substitution.
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 905
906CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsSubstituted pyridines undergo many of the side-chain reactions that substituted
benzenes undergo,such as bromination and oxidation.
When 2-or 4-aminopyridine is diazotized,or is formed.
Apparently,the diazonium salt reacts immediately with water to form a hydroxypyri-

dine (Section16.10). The product of the reaction is a pyridone because the keto form

of a hydroxypyridine is more stable than the enol form. (The mechanism for the con-

version of a primary amino group into a diazonium group is shown in Section16.12).
The electron-withdrawing nitrogen causes the of alkyl groups at-
tached to the 2-and 4-positions of the pyridine ring to have about the same acidity as

the of ketones (Section19.1).
Consequently,the of alkyl substituents can be removed by base,and the
resulting carbanions can react as nucleophiles.H2OBrNCH3NCH3NCHCH
NCH2CHOHOCH3NCH3CH2CH3NCH3CH2NH2CH3Bran SN2 reactionan aldol condensationa-hydrogensNCH3NCH2HONCH2NCH2NCH2NCH2a-hydrogensa-hydrogensg-pyridonea-pyridoneNBS/peroxideNCHCH3BrNNa2Cr2O7H2SO4CH2CH3NCH3NCOOHONNH2NNNH2NNNOHN ClNaNO2, HCl0 CNaNO2, HCl0 CNNOHN Cl4-hydroxypyridineenol formNH-pyridoneketo formNH  -pyridone
keto form2-hydroxypyridineenol formOH2OH2O2-aminopyridine4-aminopyridineBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 906
Section 21.11Biologically Important Heterocycles
9073-D Molecules:Quinoline; IsoquinolinePROBLEM 21Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing ease of removing a proton from a
methyl group:Quinoline and IsoquinolineQuinolineand isoquinoline are known as 
benzopyridinesbecause they have both a
benzene ring and a pyridine ring. Like benzene and pyridine,they are aromatic com-

pounds. The values of their conjugate acids are similar to the of the conjugate

acid of pyridine. (In order for the carbons in quinoline and isoquinoline to have the

same numbers,the nitrogen in isoquinoline is assigned the 2-position,not the lowest

possible number.)
21.11Biologically Important Heterocycles
Proteins are naturally occurring polymers of acids (Chapter23). Three of the
20 most common naturally occurring amino acids contain heterocyclic rings:Proline

contains a pyrrolidine ring,tryptophan contains an indole ring,and histidine contains

an imidazole ring.ImidazoleImidazole,the heterocyclic ring of histidine,is the first heterocyclic compound we
have encountered that has two heteroatoms.Imidazole is an aromatic compound be-

cause it is cyclic and planar,every carbon in the ring has a 
porbital,and the cloud
contains three
pairs of electrons (Section15.1). The electrons drawn as lone-pair
electrons on N-1 (see p. 896) are part of the cloud because they are in a 
porbital,whereas the lone-pair electrons on N-3 are not part of the cloud because they are in

an orbital,perpendicular to the 
porbitals.sp2ppppNH3CH2CHCOONHNCOOHHNNH
prolinetryptophanhistidine
NH3CH2CHCOOa-aminoquinolineisoquinolineHNHNH+NHN5481326754813267pKa  4.85pKa  5.14papaNCH3NICH3CH2CH3NCH3Tutorial:
Recognizing common 
heterocyclic rings in complex
moleculesBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 907
908CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsThe resonance energy of imidazole is significantly less
than the resonance energy of benzene (or ).
Imidazole can be protonated because the lone-pair electrons in the orbital are
not part of the cloud. Since the conjugate acid of imidazole has a of 6.8,imida-

zole exists in both the protonated and unprotonated forms at physiological pH 

This is one of the reasons that histidine,the imidazole-containing amino acid,is an im-

portant catalytic component of many enzymes (Section24.9).
Neutral imidazole is a stronger acid than neutral pyrrole
because of the second ring nitrogen.Notice that both protonated imidazole and the imidazole anion have two equivalent
resonance contributors. This means that the two nitrogens become equivalent when

imidazole is either protonated or deprotonated.PROBLEM 22Give the major product of the following reaction:
PROBLEM 23List imidazole,pyrrole,and benzene in order of decreasing reactivity toward electrophilic
aromatic substitution.NNCH
3Br2FeBr3HNNH
HNNH
HNNHprotonated imidazoleNNNNNNimidazole anion
resonance hybrid
resonance hybridNNH
NNH
pKa  14.4pa17pa14.4HNNH
NNHH
pKa  6.87.3.papsp2NNH
NNH
NNH
NNH
NNH
12345resonance contributors of imidazole151 kJmol36 kcalmol(59 kJmol),14 kcalmolNNHorbital structure of imidazoletheseelectrons
are part of
the    cloudthese electronsare in an sp2 orbitalperpendicular
to the p orbitalsBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 908
Section 21.11Biologically Important Heterocycles
909PROBLEM 24Imidazole boils at 257
¡C,whereas 
N-methylimidazole boils at 199
¡C. Explain this differ-
ence in boiling points.PROBLEM 25What percent of imidazole will be protonated at physiological pH Purine and PyrimidineNucleic acids (DNA and RNA) contain substituted 
purinesand substitutedpyrimidines(Section27.1); DNA contains A,G,C,and T,and RNA contains A,G,C,
and U. (Why DNA contains T instead of U is explained in Section27.14.) Unsubsti-

tuted purine and pyrimidine are not found in nature. Notice that hydroxypurines and

hydroxypyrimidines are more stable in the keto form. We will see that the preference

for the keto form is crucial for proper base pairing in DNA (Section27.7).
PorphyrinSubstituted porphyrinsare important naturally occurring heterocyclic compounds. A
porphyrin ring system
consists of four pyrrole rings joined by one-carbon bridges. Heme,
which is found in hemoglobin and myoglobin,contains an iron ion ligated by the

four nitrogens of a porphyrin ring system. Ligationis the sharing of nonbonding electrons
with a metal ion. The porphyrin ring system of heme is known as 
protoporphyrin IX
; thering system plus the iron atom is called iron protoporphyrin IX
.Hemoglobinis responsible for transporting oxygen to cells and carbon dioxide
away from cells,whereas myoglobin is responsible for storing oxygen in cells. Hemo-

globin has four polypeptide chains and four heme groups; myoglobin has one

polypeptide chain and one heme group. The iron atoms in hemoglobin and myoglobin,

in addition to being ligated to the four nitrogens of the porphyrin ring,are also ligated

to a histidine of the protein component (globin),and the sixth ligand is oxygen or car-

bon dioxide. Carbon monoxide is about the same size and shape as but CO binds
O2,CH3COOCCH2CH2HCNNFeIICCH3HCCH2CCCCH
3CHCH2CH2COOCNCHCNCCHCCCCH
3CCCHCH2CCCa porphyrin ring systemiron protoporphyrin IXhemeNNHN
NH(Fe2)NNHNNpurineOOONNHNHNH2NguanineNH2NNHNNadenineNNpyrimidineONHHNuracilOOCH3NHHNthymineNH2NHNcytosine1449875612326537.3?3-D Molecule:HemeBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 909
910CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compoundsmore tightly than to Consequently,breathing carbon monoxide can be fatal
because it prevents the transport of oxygen in the bloodstream.
The extensive conjugated system of porphyrin gives blood its characteristic red
color. Its high molar absorptivity (about 160,000) allows concentrations as low as
to be detected by UV spectroscopy (Section8.10).
The biosynthesis of porphyrin involves the formation of porphobilinogen from two
molecules of -aminolevulinic acid. The precise mechanism for this biosynthesis is as

yet unknown. A possible mechanism starts with the formation of an imine between the

enzyme that catalyzes the reaction and one of the molecules of -aminolevulinic acid.

An aldol-type condensation occurs between the imine and a free molecule of -

aminolevulinic acid. Nucleophilic attack by the amino group on the imine closes the

ring. The enzyme is then eliminated,and removal of a proton creates the aromatic ring.
Four porphobilinogen molecules react to form porphyrin.
repeat three moretimes using anintramolecular reaction forthe third repetitionsubsequent oxidationincreases the unsaturationNH3H3NCH2NHCH2H3NN
HH3NCH2NHCH2NHHH3NCH2NHCH2NHNHporphyrinNHNHHNddd1108 MFe2.O2EEEEEOOCCH2OOCCH2CH2CH2COOH2NCH2CH2COCH2NH2NH2ENH2H2NCH2NH2CCCenzymea mechanism for the biosynthesis of porphyrin  -aminolevulinic acidOOCCH2CH2CCH2CH2NH2H2OOOCCH2HCCCH2NH2baseH2ONHNNOCH2COOCH2CCH2NH2H2NCH2NH2CCCCH
2NNHHOHOOCCH2CH2CH2COOOOCCH2CH2CH2COOHHNH2porphobilinogenH2NCH2HNHH2NCH2NHOOCCH2CH2CH2COOOOCCH2CH2CH2COOEBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 910
Section 21.11Biologically Important Heterocycles
9113-D Molecule:Chlorophyll aThe ring system in chlorophyll 
a,the substance responsible for the green color of
plants,is similar to porphyrin but contains a cyclopentanone ring,and one of its pyrrole

rings is partially reduced. The metal atom in chlorophyll 
ais magnesium Vitamin also has a ring system similar to porphyrin,but one of the methine
bridges is missing. The ring system of vitamin is known as a corrin ring system.

The metal atom in vitamin is cobalt The chemistry of vitamin is dis-

cussed in Section25.7.
PROBLEM 26Is porphyrin aromatic?PROBLEM 27Show how the last two porphobilinogen molecules are incorporated into the porphyrin
ring.NH2NH2NH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2OHH3CH3CH3CH2NH2NH2NCH3H3CH3COOOOOOOOHHHHHHHHHCNNNNONNNOHNOOOPCoIIIvitamin B12B12(Co3).B12B12B12H3CMgIICH2H3CCH2CH3CH3CH3HCchlorophyll aNHHNNNCOCH3OOOO(Mg2)3-D Molecule:Vitamin B
12BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 911
912CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic CompoundsSummaryAmines are compounds in which one or more of the hydro-
gens of ammonia have been replaced by R groups. Amines are

classified as primary,secondary,or tertiary,depending on

whether one,two,or three hydrogens of ammonia have been

replaced. Amines undergo 
amine inversion
through a transi-tion state in which the nitrogen becomes an nitrogen.
Some amines are heterocyclic compounds
Ñcyclic
compounds in which one or more of the atoms of the ring is

an atom other than carbon. Heterocyclic rings are numbered

so that the heteroatom
has the lowest possible number. A
natural product
is a compound synthesized by a plant or
an animal. Alkaloidsare natural products containing one ormore nitrogen heteroatoms and are found in the leaves,

bark,roots,or seeds of plants.
Because of the lone pair on the nitrogen,amines are both
bases and nucleophiles. Amines react as nucleophiles in nu-

cleophilic substitution reactions,in nucleophilic acyl sub-

stitution reactions,in nucleophilic addition
Ðeliminationreactions,and in conjugate addition reactions.
Amines cannot undergo the substitution and elimination
reactions that alkyl halides undergo,because the leaving

groups of amines are too basic. Protonated amines also can-
not undergo the reactions that protonated alcohols and pro-

tonated ethers undergo. Amines are easily oxidized.

Saturated heterocycles containing five or more atoms have

physical and chemical properties typical of acyclic com-

pounds that contain the same heteroatom.Quaternary ammonium hydroxides and amine oxidesundergo E2 elimination reactions known as Hofmann elim-

ination reactions and Cope elimination reactions,respec-

tively. In both reactions,the proton from the -carbon

bonded to the greater number of hydrogens is removed.
bsp2sp3Quaternary ammonium salts are the most common 
phasetransfer catalysts.Primary amines can be synthesized by means of a Gabrielsynthesis,by reduction of an alkyl azide or a nitrile,by

reductive amination
,and by reduction of an amide.
Pyrrole
,furan,and 
thiopheneare aromatic compounds
that undergo electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions

preferentially at C-2. These compounds are more reactive

than benzene toward electrophiles. When pyrrole is protonat-

ed,its aromaticity is destroyed. Pyrrole polymerizes in strong-

ly acidic solutions. Indole,benzofuran,and benzothiophene

are aromatic compounds that contain a five-membered aro-

matic ring fused to a benzene ring.Replacing one of benzene
Õs carbons with a nitrogen formspyridine,an aromatic compound that undergoes electrophilic
aromatic substitution reactions at C-3 and nucleophilic aro-

matic substitution reactions at C-2 and C-4. Pyridine is less

reactive than benzene toward electrophilic aromatic substitu-

tion and more reactive toward nucleophilic aromatic sub-

stitution. Quinoline and isoquinoline are aromatic com-

pounds with both a benzene ring and a pyridine ring.
Imidazoleis the heterocyclic ring of the amino acid his-
tidine. The conjugate acid of imidazole has a of 6.8,

allowing it to exist in both the protonated and unprotonated

forms at physiological pH Nucleic acids

(DNA and RNA) contain substituted 
purinesand substitut-ed pyrimidines. Hydroxypurines and hydroxypyrimidines
are more stable in the keto form. A 
porphyrin ring system
consists of four pyrrole rings joined by one-carbon bridges;

in hemoglobin and myoglobin,the four nitrogen atoms are

ligated to The metal atom in chlorophyll 
ais and the metal atom in vitamin is Co
2.B12Mg2Fe2.pH7.3.paPORPHYRIN, BILIRUBIN, AND JAUNDICEThe average human turns over about 6g of hemo-
globin each day. The protein portion (globin) and the iron are

reutilized,but the porphyrin ring is broken down. First it is re-

duced to biliverdin,a green compound,which is subsequently
reduced to bilirubin,a yellow compound. If more bilirubin is
formed than can be excreted by the liver,bilirubin accumulates

in the blood. When the concentration of bilirubin in the blood

reaches a certain level,bilirubin diffuses into the tissues,caus-

ing them to become yellow. This condition is known as

jaundice.Summary of Reactions1.Reaction of amines as nucleophiles (Section21.4).
a.In alkylation reactions:
RRBrRBrRBrNH2RNHRRRNH2BrÐRRRNHBrÐHBrRNRRRNRRRHBrBrÐBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 912
Summary of Reactions913b.In acylation reactions:
c.In nucleophilic additionÐelimination reactions:iReaction of a primary amine with an aldehyde or ketone to form an imine:
iiReaction of a secondary amine with an aldehyde or ketone to form an enamine:
d.In conjugate addition reactions:2.Primary arylamines react with nitrous acid to form stable arenediazonium salts (Section21.4).
3.Oxidation of amines:Primary amines are oxidized to nitro compounds,secondary amines to hydroxylamines,and tertiary amines to
amine oxides (Section21.7).
4.Elimination reactions of 
quaternary ammonium hydroxides
or tertiary amine oxides(Sections21.5and 21.7).
RCH2CH2NCH3HofmanneliminationRCHCH
2NCH3H2OCH3HOCH3CH3CH3RCH2CH2NCH3CopeeliminationRCHCH
2NCH3OCH3OHin both eliminations, the proton is removed from the   -carbon bonded to the most hydrogens
CH3RCH2CH2NCH3H2O2CH3RRRNRRRONH2Oa tertiary amine oxidea tertiary amineRRNHRROHNH2Oa secondary hydroxylaminea secondary amineoxidationoxidationRoxidationNH2RoxidationNHOH
RoxidationNORNOONH2NNCl
ÐHClNaNO2CH2CRRCHRNH2CHCROONHRRCHONRRRRRRRRNHH
2OcatalyticHORRRRNH2H2OcatalyticHNCH2RRClClÐC2   R
NH2RNH3RONHRCROBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 913
914CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compounds5.Synthesis of amines (Section21.8).
a.Gabriel synthesis of primary amines:b.Reduction of an alkyl azide or a nitrile:
c.Reduction of a nitroalkane or nitrobenzene:d.Aldehydes and ketones react (1)with excess 
ammoniaplus catalyst to form primary amines,(2)with a 
primary aminefollowed by reduction with sodium triacetoxyborohydride to form secondary amines,and (3)with a 
secondary aminefollowed by
reduction with sodium triacetoxyborohydride to form tertiary amines:6.Electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.
a.Pyrrole,furan,and thiophene (Section21.9):
CCH3OCH3CClSSHClO1. SnCl42. H2ONHNHBr2BrNO2HBrHNO3OOH2O(CH3CO)2OCRRexcess NH3NaBH(OCCH3)3OH2, Pd/COCHNH
2H2O RRCRRNaBH(OCCH3)3OcatalyticHOCCH3NH2CH3NHCH3CH3CH3NCH3RRCHNHCH
3R
RcatalyticHONCH3CH3NH2metal
NO2NH2H2Pd/CCH3CH2CH2NO2CH3CH2CH2NH2H2Pd/CRBr
H2Pd/CH2Pd/CN3RNNNÐRCN
RCH
2NH2RNH
2NH1. HOH3O2. RBr
   BrÐOONRNH3RCOOHCOOHOOBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 914
Problems915b.Pyridine (Section21.10):
7.Nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions of pyridine (Section21.10).
ClNH2NNNNH2NClNNNH2ClClNBrBrNNH2NH2NH2BrBr2NHBrFeBr3300 CNBr2NFeBr390 CNOOBrPCl3NBrKey Terms
alkaloid (p.884)
amine inversion (p.885)

amines (p.883)

Cope elimination reaction (p. 894)
exhaustive methylation (p.891)

furan (p.897)

heteroatom (p.884)

heterocycle (p.884)

heterocyclic compound (p.884)
Hofmann elimination reaction (p.889)
imidazole (p.907)

iron protoporphyrin IX (p.909)

ligation (p.909)

natural product (p.884)

phase transfer catalysis (p.893)

phase transfer catalyst (p.893)

porphyrin ring system (p.909)

protoporphyrin IX (p.909)
purine (p.909)
pyridine (p.902)

pyrimidine (p.909)

pyrrole (p.897)

quaternary ammonium ion (p.889)

reductive amination (p.896)

thiophene (p.897)
Problems
28.Name the following compounds:
a.b.c.d.
29.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.e.
b.d.f.
NH2CH3CH2CH2BrCH3OCH3CClOBrNHONClC6H5Li1. CN
2. H2/PdCH3CH2CH2CH2BrCClONHCH3CH3CH2NHClNHHNCH3CH3CH3NHAU:These terms are 
boldin text.Add to list?
Or make lightface in text?
BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 915
916CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compoundsg.h.i.
30.List the following compounds in order of decreasing acidity:
31.Which of the following compounds is easier to decarboxylate?
32.Rank the following compounds in order of decreasing reactivity in an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction:
33.One of the following compounds undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution predominantly at C-3,and one undergoes
electrophilic aromatic substitution predominantly at C-4. Which is which?
34.Benzene undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions with aziridines in the presence of a Lewis acid such as 
a.What are the major and minor products of the following reaction?
b.Would you expect epoxides to undergo similar reactions?
35.A Hofmann degradation of a primary amine forms an alkene that gives butanal and 2-methylpropanal upon ozonolysis and work-
up under reducing conditions. Identify the amine.36.The dipole moments of furan and tetrahydrofuran are in the same direction. One compound has a dipole moment of 0.70D,and the
other has a dipole moment of 1.73D. Which is which?
37.Show how the vitamin niacin can be synthesized from nicotine.
38.The chemical shifts of the C-2 hydrogen in the 
1H NMR spectra of pyrrole,pyridine,and pyrrolidine are and 
Match each chemical shift with its heterocycle.
39.Explain why protonation of aniline has a dramatic effect on the compound
Õs UV spectrum,whereas protonation of pyridine has
only a small effect on that compound
Õs UV spectrum.d8.50,
d6.42,
d2.82,
NNCH3COHNOnicotineniacin
NCH3CH3AlCl3AlCl
3.NCCH2CH3ONNHCH2CH3OCH3NHCH3SCH3NCOHorONCH2COHONHHNHHNNHNHNHNHHNNHS1. Mg/Et2O2. CO23. HBrN1. NH22. CH3CH2CH2BrCH3NHC6H5NNBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 916
Problems91740.Explain why pyrrole is a much stronger acid than ammonia 
41.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
42.Quinolines are commonly synthesized by a method known as the Skraup synthesis,which involves the reaction of aniline with
glycerol under acidic conditions. Nitrobenzene is added to the reaction mixture to serve as an oxidizing agent. The first step 
in thesynthesis is the dehydration of glycerol to propenal.a.What product would be obtained if 
para
-ethylaniline were used instead of aniline?b.What product would be obtained if 3-hexen-2-one were used instead of glycerol?

c.What starting materials are needed for the synthesis of 2,7-diethyl-3-methylquinoline?
43.Propose a mechanism for each of the following reactions:
a.b.
44.Give the major product of each of the following reactions:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.i.
45.When piperidine undergoes the indicated series of reactions,1,4-pentadiene is obtained as the product. When the four differe
ntmethyl-substituted piperidines undergo the same series of reactions,each forms a different diene:1,5-hexadiene,1,4-pentadiene,
2-methyl-1,4-pentadiene,and 3-methyl-1,4-pentadiene. Which methyl-substituted piperidine yields which diene?
1.  excess CH3I/K2CO32.  Ag2O, H2O3.  NHCH3NCH2CH2CH2CHCH
2piperidine1.  excess CH3I/K2CO32.  Ag2O, H2O3.  CH2CHCH2CHCH
2CH3NCH3CH2CH31. H2O22. NCH3H3C2.  1.  H2O2CH3CHCH2NCH2CH3CH3CH3HOCH3CH3CH2MgBrNHONHPCl5Br2NO2SNCH3CH31. HO2. H2C3. HONCH3ICH3NCH3HNO3CCH3OOBr2CH3OHOCH3OOCH
3OCH3CCH2CH2CCH3OH3CCH3OOHH2OCH22 H2OH2SO4CHCHO
CH2CHCH2OHOHOH
glycerolH2CO2CH2trace HNHNHNHpKa  17pKa  36HNHNHNH2NH3pa36.pa17BRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 917
918CHAPTER 21M
ore About Amines ¥ Heterocyclic Compounds46.a.Draw resonance contributors to show why pyridine-
N-oxide is more reactive than pyridine toward electrophilic aromatic
substitutionb.At what position does pyridine-
N-oxide undergo electrophilic aromatic substitution?
47.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
48.Explain why the aziridinium ion has a considerably lower (8.0) than that of a typical secondary ammonium ion (10.0). (
Hint:Recall that the larger the bond angle,the greater the 
scharacter,and the greater the 
scharacter,the more electronegative the atom.)
49.Pyrrole reacts with excess 
para
-(N,N-dimethylamino)benzaldehyde to form a highly colored compound. Draw the structure of the
colored compound.50.2-Phenylindole is prepared from the reaction of acetophenone and phenylhydrazine,a method known as the Fischer indole
synthesis. Propose a mechanism for this reaction. (Hint:The reactive species is the enamine tautomer of the phenylhydrazone.)
51.What starting materials are required for the synthesis of the following compounds,using the Fischer indole synthesis? (
Hint:SeeProblem50.)
a.b.c.
52.Organic chemists work with tetraphenylporphyrins rather than porphyrins because tetraphenylporphyrins are much more resistan
tto air oxidation. Tetraphenylporphyrin can be prepared by the reaction of benzaldehyde with pyrrole. Propose a mechanism for th
eformation of the ring system shown here:
53.Propose a mechanism different from the one shown in Section21.11for the biosynthesis of porphobilinogen.
NHNHHNHCONHHNBF3oxidationtetraphenylporphyrinNHCH2CH3NHNHCH2CH3NHNH2NH3NHH2OHCCH3OHNNHHHaziridinium ionpKa    8.04paNOCH3CH3COCCH3NCH2OCCH3OOCH3COOOBRUI21-883_918r2  27-03-2003  3:47 PM  Page 918
919Chapters22through27
discuss thechemistry of organic compounds found in

biological systems. Many of these com-

pounds are larger than the organic

compounds you have seen up to this

point,and they may have more than one

functional group,but the principles that

govern their structure and reactivity are

essentially the same as those that govern

the structure and reactivity of the com-

pounds you have been studying. These

chapters,therefore,will give you the op-

portunity to review much of the organic

chemistry you have learned as you apply

your knowledge of organic reactions to

compounds found in the biological world.
Chapter 22introduces you to the chemistry of carbohy-drates,the most abundant class of compounds in the bio-

logical world. First you will learn about the structures

and reactions of monosaccharides. Then you will see how

they are linked to form disaccharides and polysaccha-

rides. A wide variety of carbohydrates found in nature

will be discussed.Chapter 23starts by looking at the physical properties
of amino acids. Then you will see how amino acids are

linked to form peptides and proteins. You will also see

how proteins are made in the laboratory,and you will be

able to compare this with how they are made in nature

when you read Chapter27. The structure of proteins will

be examined to prepare you for understanding how en-

zymes catalyze chemical reactions,which is covered in

Chapter24.
Chapter 24first describes the various ways that organic
reactions are catalyzed and then shows how enzymes em-

ploy the same principles in their catalysis of reactions

that occur in biological systems.Chapter 25describes the chemistry of the coenzymesÑ
organic compounds that some enzymes need to catalyze

biological reactions. Coenzymes play a variety of chemi-

cal roles:Some function as oxidizing and reducing agents,

some allow electrons to be delocalized,some activate

groups for further reaction,and some provide good nucle-

ophiles or strong bases needed for reactions. Because
coenzymes are derived from vitamins,you will see why
BioorganicCompoundsPARTSEVEN
Chapter 22CarbohydratesChapter 23Amino Acids, Peptides, and ProteinsChapter 24CatalysisChapter 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismChapter 26LipidsChapter 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides,and Nucleic AcidsBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 919
vitamins are necessary for many of the organic reactions
that occur in biological systems.Chapter 26discusses the chemistry of lipids. Lipids arewater-insoluble compounds found in animals and plants.

You will first study the structure and function of different

kinds of lipids. You will then be able to understand such

things as how aspirin prevents inflammation and what caus-

es butter to become rancid. How cholesterol and other ter-

penes are synthesized in nature will be explained as well.
Chapter 27covers the chemistry and structures of nu-
cleosides,nucleotides,and nucleic acids (RNA and

DNA). You will seeÑmechanisticallyÑwhy ATP is the

universal carrier of chemical energy,how nucleotides are

liked to form nucleic acids,why DNA contains thymines

instead of uracils,and how the genetic messages encoded

in DNA are transcribed into mRNA and then translated

into proteins. Also explained are how the sequence of

bases in DNA is determined and how DNA with specific

base sequences can be synthesized.920Author:Should this be ÒlinkedÓ?
Does not make sense as set
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 920
-D-glucose-
D-glucoseBioorganic compounds
are organic
compounds found in biological sys-

tems. Bioorganic compounds follow
the same principles of structure and reactivity

as the organic molecules we have discussed so

far. There is great similarity between the organic

reactions chemists carry out in the laboratory and

those performed by nature inside the living cell. In other words,bioorganic reactions

can be thought of as organic reactions that take place in tiny flasks called cells.
Most bioorganic compounds have more complicated structures than those of the
organic compounds you are used to seeing,but do not let the structures fool you into

thinking that their chemistry is equally complicated. One reason the structures of

bioorganic compounds are more complicated is that bioorganic compounds must be

able to recognize each other,and much of their structure is for that purposeÑa func-

tion called molecular recognition
.The first group of bioorganic compounds we will study are the 
carbohydrates
Ñthe most abundant class of compounds in the biological world,making up more than

50% of the dry weight of the EarthÕs biomass. Carbohydrates are important con-

stituents of all living organisms and have a variety of different functions. Some are

important structural components of cells; others act as recognition sites on cell sur-

faces. For example,the first event in all our lives was a sperm recognizing a carbohy-

drate on the surface of an eggÕs wall. Other carbohydrates serve as a major source of

metabolic energy. For example,the leaves,fruits,seeds,stems,and roots of plants

contain carbohydrates that plants use for their own metabolic needs and that then

serve the metabolic needs of the animals that eat the plants.
Early chemists noted that carbohydrates have molecular formulas that make them
appear to be hydrates of carbon,Ñhence the name. Later structural studies

revealed that these compounds were 
nothydrates because they did not contain intact
water molecules,but the term ÒcarbohydrateÓpersists. 
Carbohydrates
are polyhy-droxy aldehydes such as 
D-glucose,polyhydroxy ketones such as 
D-fructose,and
compounds such as sucrose that can be hydrolyzed to polyhydroxy aldehydes or
C(H2O)22Carbohydrates921D-fructoseD-glucoseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 921
922CHAPTER 22Carbohydratespolyhydroxy ketones (Section22.17). The chemical structures of carbohydrates are
commonly represented by wedge-and-dash structures or by Fischer projections.

Notice that both 
D-glucose and D-fructose have the molecular formula 
consistent with the general formula that made early chemists think that

those compounds were hydrates of carbon.Themost abundant carbohydrate in nature is 
D-glucose. Living cells oxidize
D-glucose in the first of a series of processes that provide them with energy. When an-
imals have more 
D-glucose than they need for energy,they convert excess 
D-glucoseinto a polymer called glycogen (Section22.18). When an animal needs energy,glyco-

gen is broken down into individual 
D-glucose molecules. Plants convert excess
D-glucose into a polymer known as starch. Cellulose
Ñthe major structural component
of plantsÑis another polymer of 
D-glucose. Chitin,a carbohydrate similar to cellu-
lose,makes up the exoskeletons of crustaceans,insects,and other arthropods and is

also the structural material of fungi.Animals obtain glucose from food
Ñsuch as plantsÑthat contains glucose. Plants
produce glucose by photosynthesis. During photosynthesis,plants take up water
through their roots and use carbon dioxide from the air to synthesize glucose and oxy-

gen. Because photosynthesis is the reverse of the process used by organisms to obtain

energy
Ñthe oxidation of glucose to carbon dioxide and water
Ñplants require energy
to carry out photosynthesis. Plants obtain the energy they need for photosynthesis

from sunlight,captured by chlorophyll molecules in green plants. Photosynthesis uses

the that animals exhale as waste and generates the that animals inhale to sus-

tain life. Nearly all the oxygen in the atmosphere has been released by photosynthetic

processes.22.1Classification of CarbohydratesThe terms 
Òcarbohydrate,ÓÒsaccharide,Óand ÒsugarÓare often used interchangeably.
ÒSaccharideÓcomes from the word for 
ÒsugarÓin several early languages (
sarkara
inSanskrit,sakcharon
in Greek,and 
saccharum
in Latin).There are two classes of carbohydrates:
simple carbohydrates
and complex carbo-
hydrates
. Simple carbohydrates
are monosaccharides(single sugars),whereas
complex carbohydrates
contain two or more sugar subunits linked together.
Disaccharideshave two sugar subunits linked together,
oligosaccharideshave three
to 10 sugar subunits (
oligosis Greek for Òfew
Ó) linked together,and 
polysaccharideshave more than 10 sugar subunits linked together. Disaccharides,oligosaccharides,

and polysaccharides can be broken down to monosaccharide subunits by hydrolysis.
C6H12O66 O26 CO26 H2OenergyoxidationphotosynthesisglucoseO2CO2CH2OHCH2OHHOH
HOH

HOH
a polyhydroxy ketoneCH2OHCH2OHHOCH
HCOH
HCOH
COCOCH2OHHOCH
HCOH
HCOH
HCCH2OHOHOH
HOH

HOH
HCO
HCOH
HOH
a polyhydroxy aldehydewedge-and-dashstructureD-glucoseFischer projectionwedge-and-dashstructureFischer projectionD-fructoseC6(H2O)6C6H12O6,3-D Molecules:D-Glucose; D-FructoseRecall from Section5.4that horizontal
bonds point toward the viewer and

vertical bonds point away from the

viewer in Fischer projections.
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 922
Section 22.2The 
Dand LNotation923A monosaccharide
can be a polyhydroxy aldehyde such as D-glucose or a polyhydroxyketone such as 
D-fructose. Polyhydroxy aldehydes are called 
aldoses(ÒaldÓis for alde-
hyde; ÒoseÓis the suffix for a sugar),whereas polyhydroxy ketones are called 
ketoses
.Monosaccharides are also classified according to the number of carbons they contain:

Monosaccharides with three carbons are trioses,those with four carbons are 
tetroses
,those with five carbons are 
pentoses,and those with six and seven carbons are 
hexosesandheptoses,respectively. A six-carbon polyhydroxy aldehyde such as 
D-glucose is an aldo-
hexose,whereas a six-carbon polyhydroxy ketone such as 
D-fructose is a ketohexose.
PROBLEM 1Classify the following monosaccharides:
22.2The Dand LNotationThe smallest aldose,and the only one whose name does not end in 
Òose,Óis glycer-aldehyde,an aldotriose.
Because glyceraldehyde has an asymmetric carbon,it can exist as a pair of enantiomers.
Emil Fischer and his colleagues studied carbohydrates in the late nineteenth cen-tury,when techniques for determining the configurations of compounds were not

available. Fischer arbitrarily assigned the 
R-configuration to the dextrorotatory iso-
mer of glyceraldehyde that we call 
D-glyceraldehyde. He turned out to be correct:
D-Glyceraldehyde is -glyceraldehyde,and 
L-glyceraldehyde is -
glyceraldehyde (Section5.13).
HCCH2OHOHOH
HCCH2OHOHOH
D-glyceraldehydeL-glyceraldehyde()-()()-()HOCH2CHCHOHOglyceraldehydeCH2OHHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
HCO
CH2OHCH2OHHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
OCCH2OHHCO
HOH
HOH
HOH
D-mannoseD-sedoheptuloseD-ribosea sugar subunitMMMMMMMMMx M
hydrolysismonosaccharidepolysaccharideA carbon to which four different groups
are attached is an asymmetric carbon.
HCCH2OHOHOH
HCCH2OHOHOH
(R)-()-glyceraldehyde(
S)-()-glyceraldehydeCHO
(R)-()-glyceraldehydeCH2OHHHOCCHO
(S)-()-glyceraldehydeperspective formulasFischer projections
HOCH2OHHCBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 923
The notations Dand Lare used to describe the configurations of carbohydrates and
amino acids (Section23.2),so it is important to learn what 
Dand Lsignify. In Fischer
projections of monosaccharides,the carbonyl group is always placed on top (in the

case of aldoses) or as close to the top as possible (in the case of ketoses). From its

structure,you can see that galactose has four asymmetric carbons (C-2,C-3,C-4,and

C-5). If the OH group attached to the bottom-most asymmetric carbon (the carbon that
is second from the bottom) is on the right,then the compound is a
D-sugar. If the OH
group is on the left,then the compound is an
L-sugar.
Almost all sugars found in natureare D-sugars. Notice that the mirror image of a D-sugar is an L-sugar.
Like
Rand S,Dand Lindicate the configuration of an asymmetric carbon,but they
do not indicate whether the compound rotates polarized light to the right or to the

left (Section5.7). For example,
D-glyceraldehyde is dextrorotatory,whereas
D-lactic acid is levorotatory. In other words,optical rotation,like melting or boiling
points,is a physical property of a compound,whereas 
ÒR,S,D,and 
LÓare conventions
humans use to indicate the configuration of a molecule.
The common name of the monosaccharide,together with the 
Dor Ldesignation,completely defines its structure because the relative configurations of all the asymmetric

carbons are implicit in the common name.PROBLEM 2Draw Fischer projections of 
L-glucose and L-fructose.PROBLEM 3Indicate whether each of the following is 
D-glyceraldehyde or L-glyceraldehyde,assuming
that the horizontal bonds point toward you and the vertical bonds point away from you

(Section5.6):
a.b.c.
22.3Configurations of AldosesAldotetroses have two asymmetric carbons and therefore four stereoisomers. Two of
the stereoisomers are D-sugars and two are 
L-sugars. The names of the aldotetroses
Ñerythrose and threoseÑwere used to name the erythro and threo pairs of enantiomersdescribed in Section5.9.
CH2OHHOH
HCO
HHOCH
2OHHCO
HCHOHOCH2OHD-()-glyceraldehydeD-()-lactic acidHCCH2OHOHOH
COOHCH3HOH
()()HCCH2OHOHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
HCCH2OHOHOH
HOH
HOH
HOH
L-galactosemirror image of D-galactoseD-galactosethe OH groupis on the right924CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesTutorial:
Dand LNotationBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 924
Section 22.3Configurations of Aldoses
925Movie:Configurations of theD-aldosesAldopentoses have three asymmetric carbons and therefore eight stereoisomers
(four pairs of enantiomers),while aldohexoses have four asymmetric carbons and 16

stereoisomers (eight pairs of enantiomers). The four 
D-aldopentoses and the eightD-aldohexoses are shown in Table22.1.
Diastereomersthat differ in configuration at only one asymmetric carbon are called
epimers. For example,
D-ribose and D-arabinose are C-2 epimers (they differ in con-
figuration only at C-2),and 
D-idose and D-talose are C-3 epimers.HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCO
C-2 epimersHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHOHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOHCOHCO
C-3 epimersHOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OHHOH
HCD-riboseD-arabinoseD-idoseD-taloseCH2OHHOH
HOH
HCO
CH2OHHOH
HOH
HCO
CH2OHHOH
HOH
HCO
CH2OHOHHHHCO
HOD-erythroseL-erythroseD-threoseL-threoseTABLE 22.1Configurations of the D-AldosesHCO
OHCH2OHHOHCH2OHHOHHHCO
OOHCH2OHHOHHOHHHCO
OHCH2OHHOHHHHOHCOHCH2OHHOHHOHHOHHOHCH2OHHOHHOHHHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHOHHHHOOHHOHCH2OHHHHOHCO
OOHCH2OHHHHOOHHHCO
OHCH2OHHHHOHHOHCOHCH2OHHOHHHHOHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHHHOOHHOHHOHCH2OHHHHOOHHHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHHHOHHOOHHOHCH2OHHHHOHHOHHOOHCO
HCD-glyceraldehydeD-erythroseD-riboseD-arabinoseD-alloseD-altroseD-glucoseD-mannoseD-threoseD-xyloseD-lyxoseD-guloseD-idoseD-galactoseD-taloseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 925
926CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesD-Galactose is the C-4 epimer ofD-glucose.D-Glucose,D-mannose,and 
D-galactose are the most common aldohexoses in bio-
logical systems. An easy way to learn their structures is to memorize the structure of
D-glucose and then remember that D-mannose is the C-2 epimer of 
D-glucose andD-galactose is the C-4 epimer of 
D-glucose. Sugars such as 
D-glucose and D-galactoseare also diastereomers because they are stereoisomers that are not enantiomers

(Section5.9). An epimer is a particular kind of diastereomer.
PROBLEM 4a.Are 
D-erythrose and L-erythrose enantiomers or diastereomers?b.Are 
L-erythrose and L-threose enantiomers or diastereomers?PROBLEM 5a.What sugar is the C-3 epimer of 
D-xylose?b.What sugar is the C-5 epimer of 
D-allose?c.What sugar is the C-4 epimer of 
L-gulose?PROBLEM 6Give systematic names to the following compounds. Indicate the configuration (
Ror S) ofeach asymmetric carbon:a.D-glucoseb.
L-glucose22.4Configurations of KetosesNaturally occurring ketoses have the ketone group in the 2-position. The configurations
of the D-2-ketoses are shown in Table22.2. A ketose has one fewer asymmetric carbon
than does an aldose with the same number of carbon atoms. Therefore,a ketose has only

half as many stereoisomers as an aldose with the same number of carbon atoms.
PROBLEM 7What sugar is the C-3 epimer of D-fructose?PROBLEM 8How many stereoisomers are possible for
a.a 2-ketoheptose?b.an aldoheptose?c.a ketotriose?
22.5Redox Reactions of MonosaccharidesBecause monosaccharides contain alcoholfunctional groups and 
aldehyde(or ketone
)functional groups,the reactions of monosaccharides are an extension of what you have

already learned about the reactions of alcohols,aldehydes,and ketones. For example,an

aldehyde group in a monosaccharide can be oxidized or reduced and can react with nu-

cleophiles to form imines,hemiacetals,and acetals. When you read the sections that deal

with the reactions of monosaccharides,you will find cross-references to the sections in

which the same reactivity for simple organic compounds is discussed. As you study,

refer back to these sections; they will make learning about carbohydrates a lot easier and

will give you a good review of some chemistry that you have already learned about.
ReductionThe carbonyl group of aldoses and ketoses can be reduced by the usual carbonyl-group

reducing agents (e.g.,Section20.1). The product of the reduction is a polyal-

cohol,known as an 
alditol. Reduction of an aldose forms one alditol. Reduction of aketose forms two alditols because the reaction creates a new asymmetric carbon in the
NaBH4;Diastereomers are configurational
isomers that are not enantiomers.
D-Mannose is the C-2 epimer of D-glucose.BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 926
Section 22.5Redox Reactions of Monosaccharides
927D-erythruloseD-ribuloseD-psicoseD-fructoseD-sorboseD-tagatoseD-xylulosedihydroxyacetoneTABLE 22.2Configurations of the D-KetosesOHCH2OHHOHCH2OHHOHHOHCH2OHHOHHOHHCH2OHOCOHCH2OHHOHHHCH2OHOCOHCH2OHHHHOHOOH
HCH2OHOCOHCH2OHHHHOHHOCH2OHOCCH2OHOCOHCH2OHHHHOCH2OHOCCH2OHOCCH2OHCH2OHOCproduct. D-Mannitol,the alditol formed from the reduction of 
D-mannose,is found in
mushrooms,olives,and onions. The reduction of 
D-fructose forms D-mannitol andD-glucitol,the C-2 epimer of 
D-mannitol. D-GlucitolÑalso called sorbitolÑis about60% as sweet as sucrose. It is found in plums,pears,cherries,and berries and is used

as a sugar substitute in the manufacture of candy.
D-Glucitol is also obtained from the reduction of either D-glucose or L-gulose.D-XylitolÑobtained from the reduction of 
D-xyloseÑis used as a sweetening agent in
cereals and in sugarless gum.D-glucoseL-gulosedrawn upside downH2Pd/CH2Pd/CHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
OHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHCH2OHD-glucitolan alditolHOH
OHHOH
HOH
HCHCH2OH1.  NaBH42.  H3O1.  NaBH42.  H3O1.  NaBH42.  H3OHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCH2OHCOD-fructoseHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOHCOCH
2OHD-mannoseHOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OHHOH
D-mannitolan alditolCH2OHHOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OHHOH
D-glucitolan alditolBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 927
928CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesPROBLEM 9What products are obtained from the reduction ofa.D-idose?b.
D-sorbose?PROBLEM 10a.What other monosaccharide is reduced only to the alditol obtained from the reduction of 
1.D-talose?2.D-galactose?b.What monosaccharide is reduced to two alditols,one of which is the alditol obtained
from the reduction of1.D-talose?2.D-mannose?OxidationAldoses can be distinguished from ketoses by observing what happens to the color of an
aqueous solution of bromine when it is added to the sugar. is a mild oxidizing agent

and easily oxidizes the aldehyde group,but it cannot oxidize ketones or alcohols. Conse-

quently,if a small amount of an aqueous solution of is added to an unknown mono-

saccharide,the reddish-brown color of will disappear if the monosaccharide is an

aldose,but will persist if the monosaccharide is a ketose. The product of the oxidation re-

action is an aldonic acid.Both aldoses and ketoses are oxidized to aldonic acids by Tollens reagent 
so that reagent cannot be used to distinguish between aldoses and ke-
toses. Recall from Section20.3,however,that Tollens reagent oxidizes aldehydes

but not ketones. Why,then,are ketoses oxidized by Tollens reagent,while ketones

are not? Ketoses are oxidized because the reaction is carried out under basic condi-

tions,and in a basic solution,ketoses are converted into aldoses by enolization

(Section19.2). For example,the ketose 
D-fructose is in equilibrium with its enol.
However,the enol of 
D-fructose is also the enol of D-glucose,as well as the enol of
D-mannose. Therefore,when the enol reketonizes,all three carbonyl compounds
are formed.HO),NH3,(Ag,H2OredHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHBr2colorless2 BrHHCO
D-glucoseHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHCOOHD-gluconic acidan aldonic acidBr2Br2Br2HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCH2OHCOD-fructosea ketoseHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCOH
COH
enol of D-fructoseenol of D-glucoseenol of D-mannose HO, H2O HO, H2O HO, H2O HO, H2OHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
D-glucosean aldoseHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOHCO
D-mannosean aldoseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 928
Section 22.6Osazone Formation
929PROBLEM 11Write the mechanism for the base-catalyzed conversion of 
D-fructose into D-glucose andD-mannose.PROBLEM 12When D-tagatose is added to a basic aqueous solution,an equilibrium mixture of three
monosaccharides is obtained. What are these monosaccharides?
If an oxidizing agent stronger than those discussed previously is used (such as
),one or more of the alcohol groups can be oxidized in addition to the aldehyde
group. A primary alcohol is the one most easily oxidized. The product that is obtained

when both the aldehyde and the primary alcohol groups of an aldose are oxidized is

called an aldaric acid. (In an acid,end is oxidized. In an acid,
both ends oxidized.)
PROBLEM 13a.Name an aldohexose other than 
D-glucose that is oxidized to D-glucaric acid by nitric acid.b.What is another name for 
D-glucaric acid?c.Name another pair of aldohexoses that are oxidized to identical aldaric acids.
22.6Osazone FormationThe tendency of monosaccharides to form syrups that do not crystallize made the pu-
rification and isolation of monosaccharides difficult. Emil Fischer found that when

phenylhydrazine is added to an aldose or a ketose,a yellow crystalline solid that is in-

soluble in water is formed. He called this derivative an osazone (
ÒoseÓfor sugar;ÒazoneÓfor hydrazone). Osazones are easily isolated and purified and were once used
extensively to identify monosaccharides.
Aldehydes and ketones react with one equivalent of phenylhydrazine,forming
phenylhydrazones (Section18.6). Aldoses and ketoses,in contrast,react with three

equivalents of phenylhydrazine,forming osazones. One equivalent functions as an ox-

idizing agent and is reduced to aniline and ammonia. Two equivalents form imines

with carbonyl groups. The reaction stops at this point,regardless of how much phenyl-

hydrazine is present. (Recall that the pH at which imine formation is carried out must

be carefully controlled; Section18.6.)
D-glucose HNO3HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
COOHHCOOHD-glucaric acidan aldaric acidarealdariconealdonicHNO33 NH2NHHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
NH32 H2OHOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OHNH2CNNHC
6H5HCNNHC6H5D-glucosethe osazone of 
D-glucosecatalyticHBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 929
930CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesMEASURING THE BLOODGLUCOSE LEVELS OF DIABETICSGlucose reacts with an group of hemoglobin
to form an imine (Section18.6) that subsequently undergoes an
NH2Diabetes results when the body does not produce sufficient in-
sulin or when the insulin it produces does not properly stimulate

its target cells. Because insulin is the hormone that maintains the

proper level of glucose in the blood,diabetics have increased

blood glucose levels. The amount of hemoglobin-formed is

proportional to the concentration of glucose in the blood,so dia-

betics have a higher concentration of hemoglobin-than nondi-
AIcAIcrearrangementCH2NHÐhemoglobinHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCN
ÐhemoglobinHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCONH2_hemoglobinD-glucosehemoglobin-A
IccatalyticHirreversible rearrangement to a more stable 
known as hemoglobin-
AIc.a-aminoketoneabetics. Thus,measuring the hemoglobin-level is a way to de-
termine whether the blood glucose level of a diabetic is being con-

trolled. Cataracts,a common complication in diabetics,are caused

by the reaction of glucose with the group of proteins in the

lens of the eye. It is thought that the arterial rigidity common in

old age may be attributable to a similar reaction of glucose with

the group of proteins.
NH2NH2AIcBecause the configuration of the number-2 carbon is lost during osazone formation,
C-2 epimers form identical osazones. For example,
D-idose and D-gulose,which are C-2
epimers,both form the same osazone.
The number-1 and number-2 carbons of ketoses react with phenylhydrazine,too. Con-
sequently,
D-fructose,D-glucose,and 
D-mannose all form the same osazone.PROBLEM 14Name a ketose and another aldose that form the same osazone as
a.D-ribosec.
L-idoseb.D-altrosed.
D-galactosePROBLEM 15What monosaccharides form the same osazone as D-sorbose?C-2 epimers form identical osazones.HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCH2OHCOHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
3 H2NNHHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OH3 H2NNHCNNHC
6H5HCNNHC6H5D-fructoseD-glucosethe osazone of
D-glucose and/of D-fructosecatalyticHcatalyticH3 NH2NHHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OH3 NH2NHCNNHC
6H5HCNNHC6H5D-idoseD-gulosethe osazone ofD-idose and of D-gulosecatalyticHcatalyticHBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 930
Section 22.8Chain Shortening: The Ruff Degradation
931Heinrich Kiliani (1855Ð1945)wasborn in Germany. He received a

Ph.D. from the University of Munich,

studying under Professor Emil

Erlenmeyer. Kiliani became a

professor of chemistry at the

University of Freiburg.
The KilianiÐFischer synthesisleads to a pair of C-2 epimers.22.7Chain Elongation: The KilianiÐFischer SynthesisThe carbon chain of an aldose can be increased by one carbon in a 
KilianiÐFischersynthesis. In other words,tetroses can be converted into pentoses,and pentoses can be
converted into hexoses.
In the first step of the synthesis (the Kiliani portion),the aldose is treated with sodi-
um cyanide and HCl (Section18.4). Addition of cyanide ion to the carbonyl group cre-

ates a new asymmetric carbon. Consequently,two cyanohydrins that differ only in

configuration at C-2 are formed. The configurations of the other asymmetric carbons

do not change,because no bond to any of the asymmetric carbons is broken during the

course of the reaction (Section5.12). Kiliani went on to hydrolyze the cyanohydrins to

aldonic acids (Section17.18),and Fischer had previously developed a method to con-

vert aldonic acids to aldoses. This reaction sequence was used for many years,but the

method currently employed to convert the cyanohydrins to aldoses was developed by

Serianni and Barker in 1979; it is referred to as the modified Kiliani
ÐFischer synthesis.Serianni and Barker reduced the cyanohydrins to imines,using a partially deactivated

palladium (on barium sulfate) catalyst so that the imines would not be further reduced

to amines. The imines could then be hydrolyzed to aldoses (Section18.6).
Notice that the synthesis leads to a pair of C-2 epimers because the first step of the re-
action converts the carbonyl carbon in the starting material to an asymmetric carbon.

Therefore,the OH bonded to C-2 in the product can be on the right or on the left in the

Fischer projection. The two epimers are not obtained in equal amounts,however,be-

cause the first step of the reaction produces a pair of diastereomers and diastereomers

are generally formed in unequal amounts (Section5.19).
PROBLEM 16What monosaccharides would be formed in a Kiliani
ÐFischer synthesis starting with one
of these?a.D-xyloseb.
L-threose22.8Chain Shortening: The Ruff Degradation
The Ruff degradation
is the opposite of the KilianiÐFischer synthesis. Thus,the 
Ruffdegradationshortens an aldose chain by one carbon:Hexoses are converted into pen-
toses,and pentoses are converted into tetroses. In the Ruff degradation,the calcium

salt of an aldonic acid is oxidized with hydrogen peroxide. Ferric ion catalyzes the

oxidation reaction,which cleaves the bond between C-1 and C-2,forming and an

aldehyde. It is known that the reaction involves the formation of radicals,but the

precise mechanism is not well understood.CO2Otto Ruff (1871Ð1939)was born in Germany. He received a Ph.D.

from the University of Berlin. He 

was a professor of chemistry at the

University of Danzig and later at 

the University of Breslau.
H2HClPd/BaSO4H2Othe modified KilianiÐFischer synthesisH2HClH2OCH2OHHOH
HOH
CNHCO
HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCNHOH
NH4HOH
HOH
CH2OHHCO
HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCO
NH4HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCNHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCNH
HCNH
HOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHClHClD-erythroseD-riboseD-arabinoseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 931
932CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesThe calcium salt of the aldonic acid necessary for the Ruff degradation is easily ob-
tained by oxidizing an aldose with an aqueous solution of bromine and then adding

calcium hydroxide to the reaction mixture.PROBLEM 17What two monosaccharides can be degraded to
a.D-arabinose?c.
L-ribose?b.D-glyceraldehyde?22.9Stereochemistry of Glucose: The Fischer Proof
In 1891,Emil Fischer determined the stereochemistry of glucose using one of the most
brilliant examples of reasoning in the history of chemistry. He chose for

his study because it was the most common monosaccharide found in nature.
Fischer knew that was an aldohexose,but 16 different structures can be
written for an aldohexose. Which of them represents the structure of The

16 stereoisomers of the aldohexoses are actually eight pairs of enantiomers,so if you

know the structures of one set,you automatically know the structures of the other set.

Therefore,Fischer needed to consider only one set of eight. He considered the eight

stereoisomers that had the C-5 OH group on the right in the Fischer projection (the

stereoisomers we now call the 
D-sugars). One of these would be one enantiomer of
glucose,and its mirror image would be the other enantiomer. It was not possible to de-

termine whether was 
D-glucose or L-glucose until 1951 (Section5.13).
Fischer used the following information to determine glucose
Õs stereochemistryÑthatis,to determine the configuration of each of its asymmetric carbons.
1.When the KilianiÐFischer synthesis is performed on the sugar known as
the two sugars known as and are obtained.
This means that and are C-2 epimers; in other words,

they have the same configuration at C-3,C-4,and C-5. Consequently,(
)-glucose()-mannose()-glucose()-mannose()-glucose()-arabinose,()-glucose()-glucose?()-glucose()-glucose1.  Br2, H2O2.  Ca(OH)2HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHCOO(Ca2)1/2D-glucosecalcium D-gluconateFe3the Ruff degradationHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCO
H2O2CO2HOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHCOO(Ca2)1/2D-arabinosecalcium D-gluconateOHCH2OHHOHHOHHOHHOHCH2OHHOHHOHHHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHOHHHHOOHHOHCH2OHHOHHHHOHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHHHOOHHOHHOHCH2OHHHHOOHHHHOOHCO
HCOHCH2OHHHHOHHOOHHOHCH2OHHHHOHHOHHOOHCO
HCD-alloseD-altroseD-glucoseD-mannoseD-guloseD-idoseD-galactoseD-talose12345678
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 932
and have to be one of the following pairs:sugars 1 and 2,3 and 4,5
and 6,or 7 and 8.
2.and are both oxidized by nitric acid to optically active
aldaric acids. The aldaric acids of sugars 1 and 7 would not be optically active because

they have a plane of symmetry. (A compound with a plane of symmetry has a superim-

posable mirror image; Section5.10.) Excluding sugars 1 and 7 means that 

and must be sugars 3 and 4 or 5 and 6.
3.Because and are the products obtained when the
KilianiÐFischer synthesis is carried out on there are only two possibil-
ities for the structure of That is,if and are

sugars 3 and 4,then has the structure shown below on the left; on the

other hand,if and are sugars 5 and 6,then 

has the structure shown on the right:
When is oxidized with nitric acid,the aldaric acid that is obtained is
optically active. This means that the aldaric acid does 
nothave a plane of symmetry.
Therefore,must have the structure shown on the left because the

aldaric acid of the sugar on the right has a plane of symmetry. Thus,and
are represented by sugars 3 and 4.4.The last step in the Fischer proof was to determine whether is
sugar 3 or sugar 4. To answer this question,Fischer had to develop a chemical method

that would interchange the aldehyde and primary alcohol groups of an aldohexose.

When he chemically interchanged the aldehyde and primary alcohol groups of the

sugar known as he obtained an aldohexose that was different from
When he chemically interchanged the aldehyde and primary alcoholgroups of he still had Therefore,he concluded that
is sugar 3 because reversing the aldehyde and alcohol groups of sugar 3
leads to a different sugar (
L-gulose).If is sugar 3,must be sugar 4. As predicted,when the alde-
hyde and primary alcohol groups of sugar 4 are reversed,the same sugar is obtained.
()-mannose()-glucose()-glucose()-mannose.()-mannose,()-glucose.()-glucose,()-glucose()-mannose()-glucose()-arabinose()-arabinoseHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHHCO
the structure of ()-arabinose if()-glucose and ()-mannoseare sugars 3 and 4HOH
HOH
HOH
CH2OHHCO
the structure of ()-arabinose if()-glucose and ()-mannoseare sugars 5 and 6()-arabinose()-mannose()-glucose()-arabinose()-mannose()-glucose()-arabinose.()-arabinose,()-mannose()-glucose()-mannose()-glucose()-mannose()-Glucose()-mannosereverse the aldehyde and primary alcohol groupsHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOHCO
HOH
HHOH
HOH
HCO
HOCH2OHD-mannoseD-mannosedrawn upside downSection 22.9Stereochemistry of Glucose: The Fischer Proof
933reverse the aldehyde and primary alcohol groupsHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
HCO
HCH2OHD-glucoseL-gulosedrawn upside downBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 933
934CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesGLUCOSE/DEXTROSEAndr” Dumas first used the term 
ÒglucoseÓin1838 to refer to the sweet compound that comes
from honey and grapes. Later,Kekul
” (Section7.1) decided
that it should be called dextrose because it was dextrorotatory.
When Fischer studied the sugar,he called it glucose,and
chemists have called it glucose ever since,although dextrose is

often found on food labels.Using similar reasoning,Fischer went on to determine the stereochemistry of 14 of
the 16 aldohexoses. He received the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1902 for this

achievement. His original guess that is a 
D-sugar was later shown to be
correct,so all of his structures are correct (Section5.13). If he had been wrong and
had been an L-sugar,his contribution to the stereochemistry of aldoses
would still have had the same significance,but all his stereochemical assignments

would have been reversed.
()-glucose()-glucoseJean-Baptiste-Andr” Dumas
(1800Ð1884)was born in France.
Apprenticed to an apothecary,he left

to study chemistry in Switzerland. He

became a professor of chemistry at

the University of Paris and at the

Coll‘ge de France. He was the first

French chemist to teach laboratory

courses. In 1848,he left science for a

political career. He became a senator,

master of the French mint,and mayor

of Paris.
PROBLEM 18SOLVED
Aldohexoses Aand B form the same osazone. Ais oxidized by nitric acid to an optically
active aldaric acid,and B is oxidized to an optically inactive aldaric acid. Ruff degradation

of either A or B forms aldopentose C,which is oxidized by nitric acid to an optically active

aldaric acid. Ruff degradation of C forms D,which is oxidized by nitric acid to an optical-

ly active aldaric acid. Ruff degradation of D forms Identify A,B,C,

and D.SOLUTIONThis is the kind of problem that should be solved working backwards. The
bottom-most asymmetric carbon in D must have the OH group on the right because D is

degraded to D must be 
D-threose,since D is oxidized to an optically
active aldaric acid. The two bottom-most asymmetric carbons in C and D have the same

configuration because C is degraded to D. C must be 
D-lyxose,since it is oxidized to an
optically active aldaric acid. A and B,therefore,must be 
D-galactose and D-talose. Because
A is oxidized to an optically active aldaric acid,it must be 
D-talose and B must be
D-galactose.PROBLEM 19Identify A,B,C,and D in the preceding problem if D is oxidized to an optically 
inactivealdaric acid,A,B,and C are oxidized to optically active aldaric acids,and interchanging

the aldehyde and alcohol groups of A leads to a different sugar.
22.10Cyclic Structure of Monosaccharides:
Hemiacetal FormationD-Glucose exists in three different forms:the open-chain form of 
D-glucose that we
have been discussing and two cyclic forms
Ñ-D-glucose and -
D-glucose. We know
that the two cyclic forms are different,because they have different physical properties:
-D-Glucose melts at 146
¡C,whereas -
D-glucose melts at 150
¡C; -
D-glucose hasa specific rotation of whereas -
D-glucose has a specific rotation of 
How can 
D-glucose exist in a cyclic form? In Section18.7,we saw that an aldehyde
reacts with an equivalent of an alcohol to form a hemiacetal. A monosaccharide such

as D-glucose has an aldehyde group and several alcohol groups. The alcohol group
bonded to C-5 of 
D-glucose reacts intramolecularly with the aldehyde group,forming
a six-membered-ring hemiacetal. Why are there two different cyclic forms? Two dif-

ferent hemiacetals are formed because the carbonyl carbon of the open-chain sugar be-

comes a new asymmetric carbon in the hemiacetal. If the OH group bonded to the new

asymmetric carbon is on the right,the hemiacetal is -
D-glucose; if the OH group is on
a18.7¡.b112.2¡,ababa()-glyceraldehyde.()-glyceraldehyde.AU:OKas changed?
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 934
OOpyranfuranSection 22.10Cyclic Structure of Monosaccharides: Hemiacetal Formation
935the left,the hemiacetal is -
D-glucose.The mechanism for cyclic hemiacetal forma-
tion is the same as the mechanism for hemiacetal formation between individual alde-

hyde and alcohol molecules (Section18.7).
-D-Glucose and -
D-glucose are called anomers. Anomersare two sugars that dif-
fer in configuration only at the carbon that was the carbonyl carbon in the open-chain

form. This carbon is called the 
anomeric carbon. Anois Greek for ÒupperÓ; thus,anomers differ in configuration at the upper-most asymmetric carbon. The anomeric car-

bon is the only carbon in the molecule that is bonded to two oxygens. The prefixes 

and denote the configuration about the anomeric carbon. Anomers,like epimers,are

a particular kind of diastereomersÑthey differ in configuration at only one carbon atom.
In an aqueous solution,the open-chain compound is in equilibrium with the two
cyclic hemiacetals. Formation of the cyclic hemiacetals proceeds nearly to completion

(unlike formation of acyclic hemiacetals),so very little glucose exists in the open-chain

form (about 0.02%). At equilibrium,there is almost twice as much -
D-glucose (64%)as -D-glucose (36%). The sugar still undergoes the reactions discussed in previous
sections (oxidation,reduction,and osazone formation) because the reagents react with

the small amount of open-chain aldehyde that is present. As the aldehyde reacts,the

equilibrium shifts to form more open-chain aldehyde,which can then undergo reaction.

Eventually,all the glucose molecules react by way of the open-chain aldehyde.
When crystals of pure -
D-glucose are dissolved in water,the specific rotation gradu-
ally changes from to When crystals of pure -
D-glucose are dissolved
in water,the specific rotation gradually changes from to This change in

rotation occurs because,in water,the hemiacetal opens to form the aldehyde and,when

the aldehyde recyclizes,both -
D-glucose and -
D-glucose can be formed. Eventually,
the three forms of glucose reach equilibrium concentrations. The specific rotation of the

equilibrium mixture is 
Ñthis is why the same specific rotation results whether
the crystals originally dissolved in water are -
D-glucose or -
D-glucose. A slow change
in optical rotation to an equilibrium value is known as 
mutarotation
.If an aldose can form a five- or a six-membered-ring,it will exist predominantly as a
cyclic hemiacetal in solution. Whether a five-or a six-membered ring is formed depends

on their relative stabilities. Six-membered-ring sugars are called 
pyranoses,and five-
membered-ring sugars are called furanoses. These names come from 
pyran
and furan
,the names of the five-and six-membered-ring cyclic ethers shown in the margin. Conse-

quently,-
D-glucose is also called -
D-glucopyranose. The prefix indicates the
configuration about the anomeric carbon,and 
Òpyranose
Óindicates that the sugar exists
as a six-membered-ring cyclic hemiacetal.
Fischer projections are not the best way to show the structure of a cyclic sugar,
because of how the bond is represented. A somewhat more satisfactory

representation is given by a 
Haworth projection
.In a Haworth projection of a 
D-pyranose,the six-membered ring is represented as
flat and is viewed edge on. The ring oxygen is always placed in the back right-hand

corner of the ring,with the anomeric carbon (C-1) on the right-hand side and the

primary alcohol group drawn 
upfrom the back left-hand corner (C-5). Groups on
the rightin a Fischer projection are 
downin a Haworth projection,whereas groups
on the leftin a Fischer projection are upin a Haworth projection.
COCa-aaba52.7¡ba52.7¡.18.7¡b52.7¡.112.2¡aabb-a-baHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHCHOH
HOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHCHOH
   -D-glucose36%0.02%
  -D-glucose64%anomeric carbonbMovie:Cyclization of a
monosaccharideGroups on the 
rightin a Fischerprojection are 
downin a Haworthprojection.
Groups on the 
leftin a Fischerprojection are 
upin a Haworthprojection.
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 935
936CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesThe Haworth projection of a 
D-furanose is viewed edge on,with the ring oxygen
away from the viewer. The anomeric carbon is on the right-hand side of the molecule,

and the primary alcohol group is drawn 
upfrom the back left-hand corner.
Ketoses also exist predominantly in cyclic forms. 
D-Fructose forms a five-membered-
ring-hemiketal as a consequence of the C-5 OH groupreacting with the ketone carbonyl

group (Section18.7). If the new asymmetric carbon has the OH group on the right in a

Fischer projection,the compound is -
D-fructose; if the OH group is on the left,the
compound is -
D-fructose. These sugars can also be called -
D-fructofuranose and -D-fructofuranose. Notice that in fructose the anomeric carbon is C-2,not C-1 as in
aldoses. D-Fructose can also form a six-membered ring by using the C-6 OH group. The
pyranose form predominates in the monosaccharide,whereas the furanose form

predominates when the sugar is part of a disaccharide. (See the structure of sucrose in

Section22.17.)
Haworth projections are useful because they allow us to see easily whether 
the OH groups on the ring are cis or trans to each other. Because five-membered

rings are close to planar,furanoses are well represented by Haworth projections.

However,Haworth projections are structurally misleading for pyranoses because a

six-membered ring is not flat but exists preferentially in a chair conformation

(Section2.12).
babaHOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHOHHHOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHHHOHOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHHOH
OHHOH
HCH2OHHOHOCH2HOCH2OOOHOHOHOHOHOHHOHOCH2OHOHOHHOHOCH2OHOHOHOO12
3
4
5612
3
4565411423532Fischer projectionsHaworth projections-D-glucopyranose-D-glucopyranose-D-ribofuranose-D-ribofuranose3-D Molecules:-D-Glucopyranose;-D-Glucopyranose;-D-Ribofuranose;-D-RibofuranosebabaHOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHOCH2HOHO
CH2OHHOH
HCH2OHHOHOHOO
OHHOH
HOH
CH2HOCH2HOH
CH2OHHOH
HOH
CH2HOCH2OHCH2OHHOCH2CH2OHOOOHOHHOHOHOHOHOHO
OHOHOHOHOCH2CH2OHOHHOHOO-D-fructofuranose-
D-fructopyranose-
D-fructopyranose-D-fructofuranoseFischer projectionsHaworth projections2134
562134
56165221534643Sir Walter Norman Haworth
(1883Ð1950)was born in England.He received a Ph.D. in Germany

from the University of Gıttingen and

later was a professor of chemistry at

the Universities of Durham and

Birmingham in Great Britain. He was

the first to synthesize vitamin C and

was the one who named it ascorbic
acid. During World War II,he worked

on the atomic bomb project. He re-

ceived the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
in 1937 and was knighted in 1947.BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 936
Section 22.11Stability of Glucose
937The -position is to the right in a Fischer
projection, down in a Haworth

projection, and axial in a chair

conformation.APROBLEM 204-Hydroxy- and 5-hydroxyaldehydes exist primarily in the cyclic hemiacetal form. Give
the structure of the cyclic hemiacetal formed by each of the following:
a.4-hydroxybutanalc.4-hydroxypentanal
b.5-hydroxypentanald.4-hydroxyheptanal
PROBLEM 21Draw the following sugars,using Haworth projections:
a.-
D-galactopyranoseb.-
D-tagatopyranosec.-
L-glucopyranose
PROBLEM 22D-Glucose most often exists as a pyranose,but it can also exist as a furanose. Draw the Ha-
worth projection of -
D-glucofuranose.22.11Stability of GlucoseDrawing glucose in its chair conformation shows why it is the most common aldohex-
ose in nature. To convert a Haworth projection into a chair conformation,start by

drawing the chair so that the back is on the left and the footrest is on the right. Then

place the ring oxygen at the back right-hand corner and the primary alcohol group in

the equatorial position. (It would be helpful here to build a molecular model.) The pri-

mary alcohol group is the largest of all the substituents,and large substituents are

more stable in the equatorial position because there is less steric strain in that position
(Section2.13). Because the OH group bonded to C-4 is trans to the primary alcohol

group (this is easily seen in the Haworth projection),the C-4 OH group is also in the

equatorial position. (Recall from Section2.14that 1,2-diequatorial substituents are

trans to one another.) The C-3 OH group is trans to the C-4 OH group,so the C-3 OH

group is also in the equatorial position. As you move around the ring,you will find that

all the OH substituents in -
D-glucose are in equatorial positions. The axial positions
are all occupied by hydrogens,which require little space and therefore experience lit-

tle steric strain. No other aldohexose exists in such a strain-free conformation. This

means that -
D-glucose is the most stable of all the aldohexoses,so it is not surprising
that it is the most prevalent aldohexose in nature.
HOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHHHOCH2OHOOHOHOHOHHOCH2OHHOHOHOOFischer projectionHaworth projectionchair conformation
-D-glucose123456654112345632HOHO
OHHOH
HCH2OHHOHHCH2OHOOHOHOHOHHOCH2OHHOHOHOO-D-glucoseFischer projectionHaworth projectionchair conformation
12
3
4
56654112345632bbaaabThe -position is to the left in a Fischer
projection, up in a Haworth projection,

and equatorial in a chair conformation.BBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 937
938CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesWhy is there more -
D-glucose than -
D-glucose in an aqueous solution at equilibri-
um? The OH group bonded to the anomeric carbon is in the equatorial position in -
D-glucose,whereas it is in the axial position in -
D-glucose. Therefore,-
D-glucose ismore stable than -
D-glucose,so -
D-glucose predominates at equilibrium in an
aqueous solution.Ifyou remember that all the OH groups in -
D-glucose are in equatorial positions,
it is easy to draw the chair conformation of any other pyranose. For example,if you

want to draw -
D-galactose,you would put all the OH groups in equatorial positions,
except the OH groups at C-4 (because galactose is a C-4 epimer of glucose) and at C-1

(because it is the ). You would put these two OH groups in axial positions.
To draw an 
L-pyranose,draw the 
D-pyranose first,and then draw its mirror image.
For example,to draw -
L-gulose,first draw -
D-gulose. (Gulose differs from glucose
at C-3 and C-4,so the OH groups at these positions are in axial positions.) Then draw

the mirror image of -
D-gulose to get -
L-gulose.PROBLEM 23Which OH groups are in the axial position ina.-
D-mannopyranose?c.-
D-allopyranose?
b.-
D-idopyranose?
babthe OH atC-4 is axialOHCH2OHHOCH2HOOHHOHOOHHOOHOO-D-gulose-L-gulosethe OH atC-3 is axialthe OH at C-1 is equatorial (  )
bbbbOHCH2OHHOHOOHO-D-galactosethe OH atC-4 is axialthe OH atC-1 is axial (  )
a-anomerabbababab3-D Molecules:-D-Galactose;-D-Gulose;-L-GulosebbaOHCH2OHHOHOHOO-D-glucose36%axialOHCH2OHHOHOHOOCHO
CH2OHHOHOHOOH-D-glucose64%equatorialBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 938
Section 22.13Formation of Glycosides
93922.12Acylation and Alkylation of MonosaccharidesThe OH groups of monosaccharides show the chemistry typical of alcohols. For example,
they react with acetyl chloride or acetic anhydride to form esters (Sections17.8and 17.9).
The OH groups also react with methyl iodide/silver oxide to form ethers (Sec-
tion10.4). The OH group is a relatively poor nucleophile,so silver oxide is used to

increase the leaving tendency of the iodide ion in the reaction.
22.13Formation of GlycosidesIn Section18.7,we saw that after an aldehyde reacts with an equivalent of an alcohol
to form a hemiacetal,the hemiacetal reacts with a second equivalent of alcohol to form

an acetal. Similarly,the cyclic hemiacetal (or hemiketal) formed by a monosaccharide

can react with an alcohol to form an acetal (or ketal). The acetal (or ketal) of a sugar is

called a glycoside,and the bond between the anomeric carbon and the alkoxy oxygen
is called a glycosidic bond. Glycosides are named by replacing the ÒeÓending of the
sugarÕs name with Òide.ÓThus,a glycoside of glucose is a glucoside,a glycoside of
galactose is a galactoside,etc. If the pyranose or furanose name is used,the acetal is

called a pyranosideor a furanoside.Notice that the reaction of a single anomer with an alcohol leads to the formation ofboth the and The mechanism of the reaction shows why both glyco-

sides are formed. The OH group bonded to the anomeric carbon becomes protonated

in the acidic solution,and a lone pair on the ring oxygen helps expel a molecule of

water. The anomeric carbon in the resulting oxocarbenium ion is hybridized,so

that part of the molecule is planar. (An 
oxocarbenium ion
has a positive charge that is
shared by a carbon and an oxygen.) When the alcohol comes in from the top of the

plane,the is formed; when the alcohol comes in from the bottom of the

plane,the is formed. Notice that the mechanism is the same as that shown

for acetal formation in Section18.7.
a-glycosideb-glycosidesp2b-glycosides.a-OHCH2OHOHO-D-glucoseHOHOCH2OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3IexcessAg2O-D-glucosidemethyl tetra-O-methyl-SN2OHCH2OHOHO-D-glucoseHOHOOCCH3CH2OCCH3OCCH3Openta-O-acetyl-   -D-glucoseCH3COCH3COOOOOOCH3COCCH3excesspyridineOOa glycosidic bondOHHCH2OHHOHOOHOOCH2CH3CH2OHHOHOOHOHCH3CH2OHHClOCH2CH3CH2OHHOHOOHOH  -D-glucose  -D-glucopyranoseethyl   -D-glucosideethyl   -D-glucopyranosideethyl   -
D-glucosideethyl   -
D-glucopyranosideBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 939
940CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesSurprisingly,
D-glucose forms more of the than the The rea-
son for this is explained in the next section.
Similar to the reaction of a monosaccharide with an alcohol is the reaction of amonosaccharide with an amine in the presence of a trace amount of acid. The product

of the reaction is an N-glycoside. An 
N-glycosidehas a nitrogen in place of the oxy-
gen at the glycosidic linkage. The subunits of DNA and RNA are 

(Section27.1).
PROBLEM 24Why is only a trace amount of acid used in the formation of an N-glycoside?N-phenyl-  -
D-ribosylaminean   -
N-glycosideN-phenyl-  -
D-ribosylaminea   -N-glycosideOHHOHO
ONH2HOCH2HOOHOCH2HOOHOCH2HOHO
NHNHcatalyticHb--glycosidesb-glycoside.a-glycosideOCH2CH3OCH2CH3an oxocarbenium iona   -glycosidean   -glycoside
major productHBHBBHB
BHOHCH2OHmechanism of glycoside formationHOHOHOOHHOHCH2OHHOOHH2OHOCH2OHHOHOOHCH2OHHOOHCH2OHHOOOCH2CH3HBHCH2OHHOOHCH2OHHOOOCH2CH3CH3CH2OH comesin from the topCH3CH2OH comesin from the bottomHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 940
22.14The Anomeric Effect
We have seen that -
D-glucose is more stable than -
D-glucose because there is moreroom for a substituent in the equatorial position. The relative amounts of -
D-glucose and-D-glucose are only however,so the preference of the OH group for the equatorial
position is surprisingly small (Section22.10). Contrast this to the preference of the OH

group for the equatorial position in cyclohexane,which is (Table2.10on p.99).
When glucose reacts with an alcohol to form a glucoside,the major product be-
comes the Since acetal formation is reversible,the must be

more stable than the The preference of certain substituents bonded to the

anomeric carbon for the axial position is called the anomeric effect.What is responsible for the anomeric effect? One clue is that substituents that prefer
the axial position have a lone pair on the atom (Z) bonded to the ring. The bond

has a antibonding orbital. If one of the ring oxygen
Õs lone pairs is in an orbital that isparallel to the antibonding orbital,the molecule can be stabilized by electron density

from oxygen moving into the orbital. The orbital containing the axial lone pair of the

ring oxygen can overlap the orbital only if the substituent is axial. If the substituent is

equatorial,neither of the orbitals that contain a lone pair is aligned correctly for overlap.

As a result of overlap between the lone pair and the orbital,the bond is longer

and weaker and the bond within the ring is shorter and stronger than normal.
22.15Reducing and Nonreducing Sugars
Because glycosides are acetals (or ketals),they are not in equilibrium with the open-
chain aldehyde (or ketone) in neutral or basic aqueous solutions. Because they are not

in equilibrium with a compound with a carbonyl group,they cannot be oxidized by

reagents such as or Glycosides,therefore,are nonreducing sugars
Ñthey
cannot reduce or 
Hemiacetals (or hemiketals) are in equilibrium with the open-chain sugars in aque-
ous solution. So as long as a sugar has an aldehyde,a ketone,a hemiacetal,or a

hemiketal group,it is able to reduce an oxidizing agent and therefore is classified as a

reducing sugar
. Without one of these groups,it is a nonreducing sugar.
PROBLEM 25SOLVED
Name the following compounds,and indicate whether each is a reducing sugar or a non-
reducing sugar:a.b.
OHOCH3CH2OHHOHOOOHOCH2CH2CH3CH2OHHOHOOBr2.AgBr2.AgZZOOequatoriallone pairoverlapping orbitalsaxiallone pairaxiallone pairCOCZs*s*s*s*s*CZb-glucoside.a-glucosidea-glucoside.5.4:1
2:1,
ababSection 22.15Reducing and Nonreducing Sugars
941A sugar with an aldehyde, a ketone, ahemiacetal, or a hemiketal group is a

reducing sugar. A sugar without one of

these groups is a nonreducing sugar.
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 941
942CHAPTER 22Carbohydratesc.d.
SOLUTION TO 25a
The only OH group in an axial position in (a) is the one at C-3.
Therefore,this sugar is the C-3 epimer of 
D-glucose,which is 
D-allose. The substituent at
the anomeric carbon is in the Thus,the sugar
Õs name is propyl -
D-alloside orpropyl -
D-allopyranoside. Because the sugar is an acetal,it is a nonreducing sugar.
22.16Determination of Ring SizeTwo different procedures can be used to determine what size ring a monosaccharide forms.
In the first procedure,treatment of the monosaccharide with excess methyl iodide and

silver oxide converts all the OH groups to groups (Section22.12). Acid-catalyzed

hydrolysis of the acetal then forms a hemiacetal,which is in equilibrium with its open-

chain form. The size of the ring can be determined from the structure of the open-chain

form because the sole OH group is the one that had formed the cyclic hemiacetal.
In the second procedure used to determine a monosaccharide
Õs ring size,an acetal of
the monosaccharide is oxidized with excess periodic acid. (Recall from Section20.7that

periodic acid cleaves 1,2-diols.)
The formed when periodic acid cleaves a 1,2,3-diol is further oxi-
dized to formic acid and another aldehyde.formic acidan    -hydroxyaldehyde
is not furtheroxidizedHIO4OHCHOHRCHOCHOHRCHOHCHROHCRORCHOHOCHHIO4a-hydroxyaldehydeOH
CHROHRCHOOHCRRCHHIO4OCH3bbb-position.HOCH2OCH2CH3OCH2OHOHOH
OHOHCH2OHHOHOOOHCH2OHOHOHOHOOCH3CH2OCH3OCH3OacetalCH3OCH3OOHCH2OCH3OCH3OhemiacetalCH3OCH3OCH3IexcessAg2OH2OHClCH3OOCH3OCH3HHOHHCH2OCH3HHCO
1234561234
5used to formthe ringBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 942
Section 22.17Disaccharides
943The products obtained from periodate cleavage of a six-membered-ring acetal are
different from those obtained from cleavage of a five-membered-ring acetal.
PROBLEM 26What kind of aldohexose would form 
L-glyceraldehyde when its acetal is oxidized withperiodic acid?22.17DisaccharidesIf the hemiacetal group of a monosaccharide forms an acetal by reacting with an
alcohol group of another monosaccharide,the glycoside that is formed is a disac-

charide. Disaccharidesare compounds consisting of two monosaccharide subunits
hooked together by an acetal linkage. For example,maltose is a disaccharide

obtained from the hydrolysis of starch. It contains two 
D-glucose subunits hooked
together by an acetal linkage. This particular acetal linkage is called an
The linkage is between C-1 of one sugar subunit and
C-4 of the other. The 
ÒprimeÓsuperscript indicates that C-4 is not in the same ringas C-1. The linkage is an linkage because the oxygen atom in-

volved in the glycosidic linkage is in the 
Remember that theis axial when a sugar is shown in a chair conformation and is down when the sugar

is shown in a Haworth projection; theis equatorial when a sugar is

shown in a chair conformation and is up when the sugar is shown in a Haworth

projection.
HOHOHOCH2OHOHOHOOHCH2OHOOmaltosean   -1,4-glycosidic linkagethe configuration of thiscarbon is not specified14'b-a-a-position.a-1,4-glycosidicA-1,4-glycosidic linkage.2 HIO4H2OHClOOOOHOOHHCOHCOHCHCCHH2CO414HCO
HCO112556OCH3CHOHCHOHCH2OHO32456332five-membered ringOCH3OCH3O2 HIO4H2OHClOHCH2OHHHCO
4HCO
HCHCOCHOHOHCOO1256CH2OHOCH3532164CH2OHOHOHOHO345612six-membered ringformic acidD-glyceraldehydeBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 943
944CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesNotethat the structure of maltose is shown without specifying the configuration of
the anomeric carbon that is not an acetal (the anomeric carbon of the subunit on the

right marked with a wavy line),because maltose can exist in both the and forms.

In the OH group bonded to this anomeric carbon is in the axial position. In
the OH group is in the equatorial position. Because maltose can exist in
both and forms,mutarotation occurs when crystals of one form are dissolved in a

solvent. Maltose is a reducing sugar because the right-hand subunit is a hemiacetal and

therefore is in equilibrium with the open-chain aldehyde that is easily oxidized.Cellobiose,a disaccharide obtained from the hydrolysis of cellulose,also contains
two 
D-glucose subunits. Cellobiose differs from maltose in that the two glucose sub-
units are hooked together by a Thus,the only difference in

the structures of maltose and cellobiose is the configuration of the glycosidic linkage.

Like maltose,cellobiose exists in both and forms because the OH group bonded to

the anomeric carbon not involved in acetal formation can be in either the axial position

(in ) or the equatorial position (in ). Cellobiose is a reducing

sugar because the subunit on the right is a hemiacetal.
Lactose is a disaccharide found in milk. Lactose constitutes 4.5% of cow
Õs milkby weight and 6.5% of human milk. One of the subunits of lactose is 
D-galactose,and the other is D-glucose. The 
D-galactose subunit is an acetal,and the 
D-glucosesubunit is a hemiacetal. The subunits are joined through a linkage.

Because one of the subunits is a hemiacetal,lactose is a reducing sugar and under-

goes mutarotation.A simple experiment can prove that the hemiacetal linkage in lactose is in the
glucose residue rather than in the galactose residue. The disaccharide is treated with

excess methyl iodide in the presence of (Section22.12),and the product is

hydrolyzed under acidic conditions. The two acetal linkages are hydrolyzed,but all

the ether linkages are untouched. Identification of the products shows that the galac-

tose residue contained the acetal linkage in the disaccharide because it was able to
Ag2OHOHOOHD-galactose is a C-4epimer of D-glucose a   -1,4-glycosidic linkageCH2OHOHOOHOHCH2OHOOlactoseD-galactoseD-glucoseb-1,4-glycosidiccellobioseHOHOOHCH2OHOHOOHOHCH2OHOOa   -1,4-glycosidic linkageb-cellobiosea-cellobiosebaB-1,4-glycosidic linkage.bab-maltose,a-maltose,ba3-D Molecules:Maltose;
Cellobiose;
LactoseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 944
Section 22.17Disaccharides
945LACTOSE INTOLERANCELactase is an enzyme that specifically breaks the
linkage of lactose. Cats and dogs
lose their intestinal lactase when they become adults; they are

then no longer able to digest lactose. Consequently,when they are

fed milk or milk products,the undegraded lactose causes diges-

tive problems such as bloating,abdominal pain,and diarrhea.

These problems occur because only monosaccharides can pass
into the bloodstream,so lactose has to pass undigested into the
b-1,4-glycosidiclarge intestine.When humans have stomach flu or other intestinal
disturbances,they can temporarily lose their lactase,thereby be-

coming lactose intolerant. Some humans lose their lactase perma-
nently as they mature. Approximately 10% of the adult Caucasian

population of the United States has lost its lactase. Lactose intol-
erance is much more common in people whose ancestors came

from nondairy-producing countries. For example,only 3% of

Danes but 97% of Thais,are lactose intolerant.
GALACTOSEMIAAfter lactose is degraded into glucose and galac-
tose,the galactose must be converted into glucose
before it can be used by cells. Individuals who do not have the

enzyme that converts galactose into glucose have the genetic
disease known as galactosemia. Without this enzyme,galactose
accumulates in the bloodstream. This can cause mental retarda-

tion and even death in infants. Galactosemia is treated by ex-

cluding galactose from the diet.react with methyl iodide at C-4. The glucose residue,on the other hand,was unable
to react with methyl iodide at C-4 because the OH group at that position was used to

form the acetal with galactose.OCH2OHOHOHHHOHOHH2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methylgalactose2,3,6-tri-
O-methylglucoseHCH2OHOHHHHOHOHOCH2OCH3CH3OOCH3HHOCH3OHHHCH2OCH3CH3OHHHOCH3OHCH2OCH3CH3OOCH3HHOCH3OHHOHCH2OCH3CH3OHHHOCH3OHHOOHOCH3OHacetallinkagehemiacetal
linkageacetal is
hydrolyzedacetal is
hydrolyzedreactedwith CH3Idid not reactwith CH3ICH3IexcessAg2OH2OBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 945
946CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesThe most common disaccharide is sucrose (table sugar). Sucrose is obtained from
sugar beets and sugarcane. About 90 million tons of sucrose are produced in the

world each year. Sucrose consists of a 
D-glucose subunit and a 
D-fructose subunit
linked by a glycosidic bond between C-1 of glucose (in the ) and C-2 of

fructose (in the ).
Unlikethe other disaccharides that have been discussed,sucrose is not a reducing
sugar and does not exhibit mutarotation because the glycosidic bond is between the

anomeric carbon of glucose and the anomeric carbon of fructose. Sucrose,therefore,

does not have a hemiacetal or hemiketal group,so it is not in equilibrium with the

readily oxidized open-chain aldehyde or ketone form in aqueous solution.
Sucrose has a specific rotation of When it is hydrolyzed,the resulting
equimolar mixture of glucose and fructose has a specific rotation of Because

the sign of the rotation changes when sucrose is hydrolyzed,a mixture of glucose

and fructose is called invert sugar
. The enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of su-
crose is called invertase
. Honeybees have invertase,so the honey they produce is a
mixture of sucrose,glucose,and fructose. Because fructose is sweeter than sucrose,

invert sugar is sweeter than sucrose. Some foods are advertised as containing fructose

instead of sucrose,which means that they achieve the same level of sweetness with a

lower sugar content.
22.18PolysaccharidesPolysaccharides contain as few as 10 or as many as several thousand monosaccha-
ride units joined together by glycosidic linkages. The molecular weight of the indi-

vidual polysaccharide chains is variable. The most common polysaccharides are

starch and cellulose.Starch is the major component of flour,potatoes,rice,beans,corn,and peas. Starch
is a mixture of two different polysaccharides:amylose (about 20%) and amylopectin

(about 80%). Amylose is composed of unbranched chains of 
D-glucose units joined by
linkages.CH2OHHOOHOOCH2OHHOOHOOOCH2OHHOOHOOan   -1,4
-glycosidic linkagethree subunits of amylosea-1,4-glycosidic1:122.0¡.66.5¡.OHOOHOHOHOHOsucroselinkage at glucoselinkage at fructoseCH2OHHOCH2CH2OHOb-positiona-position3-D Molecule:SucroseBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 946
Section 22.18Polysaccharides
947an   -1,4'-glycosidic bond
an   -1,6'-glycosidic bond
Figure 22.1
Branching in amylopectin. Thehexagons represent glucose units.
They are joined by -1,4-and
-1,6-glyclosidic bonds.
aaAmylopectin is a branched polysaccharide. Like amylose,it is composed of chains of
D-glucose units joined by linkages. Unlike amylose,however,amy-
lopectin also contains linkages. These linkages create the branches in

the polysaccharide (Figure22.1). Amylopectin can contain up to glucose units,

making it one of the largest molecules found in nature.
Animals store their excess glucose in a polysaccharide known as glycogen. Glyco-
gen has a structure similar to that of amylopectin,but glycogen has more branches

(Figure22.2). The branch points in glycogen occur about every 10 residues,whereas

those in amylopectin occur about every 25 residues. The high degree of branching in

glycogen has important physiological effects. When the body needs energy,many indi-

vidual glucose units can be simultaneously removed from the ends of many branches.
CH2OHHOOHOOCH2OHHOOOHOCH2OHHOOHOOCH2HOOHOOOOCH2OHHOOHOO61five subunits of amylopectinan   -1,6
-glycosidic linkage106a-1,6-glycosidica-1,4-glycosidicamylopectinglycogen
Figure 22.2
A comparison of the branching inamylopectin and glycogen.WHY THE DENTIST IS RIGHTBacteria found in the mouth have an enzyme that
converts sucrose into a polysaccharide called dex-
tran. Dextran is made up of glucose units joined mainly through
and linkages. About 10% of dental
plaque is composed of dextran. This is the chemical basis of

why your dentist cautions you not to eat candy.
a-1,6-glycosidica-1,3-Tutorial:
Identifying glycosidic linkages
and numbering pyranose and
furanose ringsBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 947
948CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesFigure 22.3
The -1,4-glycosidic linkages in
amylose cause it to form a left-
handed helix. Many of its OH
groups form hydrogen bonds with
water molecules.aintermolecularhydrogen bondOOHOOHOHCH2OHCH2OHHOOOOOOHCH2OHOHOFigure 22.4
The -1,4-glycosidic linkages in
cellulose form intramolecular
hydrogen bonds, which cause the
molecules to line up in linear arrays.bThe shell of this bright orangecrab from Australia is composed
largely of chitin.Cellulose is the structural material of higher plants. Cotton,for example,is com-
posed of about 90% cellulose,and wood is about 50% cellulose. Like amylose,cellu-

lose is composed of unbranched chains of 
D-glucose units. Unlike amylose,however,
the glucose units in cellulose are joined by linkages rather than by
linkages.linkages are easier to hydrolyze than linkages
because of the anomeric effect that weakens the bond to the anomeric carbon

(Section22.14). All mammals have the enzyme that hydrolyzes the
linkages that join glucose units,but they do not have the enzyme
that hydrolyzes linkages. As a result,mammals
cannotobtain the glucose they need by eating cellulose. However,bacteria that pos-
sess inhabit the digestive tracts of grazing animals,so cows can eat

grass and horses can eat hay to meet their nutritional requirements for glucose. Ter-

mites also harbor bacteria that break down the cellulose in the wood they eat.
The different glycosidic linkages in starch and cellulose give these compounds very
different physical properties. The in starch cause amylose to form a helix

that promotes hydrogen bonding of its OH groups to water molecules (Figure22.3).

As a result,starch is soluble in water.
On the other hand,the in cellulose promote the formation of intramolecular
hydrogen bonds. Consequently,these molecules line up in linear arrays (Figure22.4),and

intermolecular hydrogen bonds form between adjacent chains. These large aggregates

cause cellulose to be insoluble in water. The strength of these bundles of polymer chains

makes cellulose an effective structural material. Processed cellulose is also used for the

production of paper and cellophane.Chitin is a polysaccharide that is structurally similar to cellulose. It is the major struc-
tural component of the shells of crustaceans (e.g.,lobsters,crabs,and shrimps) and the ex-

oskeletons of insects. Like cellulose,chitin has linkages. It differs from

cellulose,though,in that it has an 
N-acetylamino group instead of an OH group at the C-2
position. The linkages give chitin its structural rigidity.
three subunits of chitinHONHC
CH3ONHC
CH3ONHC
CH3OCH2OHOOHOCH2OHOOHOOCH2OHOOb-1,4-glycosidicb-1,4-glycosidicb-linkagesa-linkagesb-glucosidaseb-1,4-glycosidic(b-glucosidase)a-1,4-glycosidic(a-glucosidase)b-1,4-glycosidica-1,4-GlycosidicHOOHCH2OHOOHOOHCH2OHOOHOOOHCH2OHOOa   -1,4-glycosidic linkagethree subunits of cellulosea-1,4-glycosidicb-1,4-glycosidicStrands of cellulose in a plantfiberBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 948
CONTROLLING FLEASSeveral different drugs have been developed
to help pet owners control fleas. One of these
drugs is lufenuron,the active ingredient in Program.

Lufenuron interferes with the production of chitin. Since

the exoskeleton of a flea is composed primarily of chitin,a

flea cannot live if it cannot make chitin.
¨Section 22.19Some Naturally Occurring Products Derived from Carbohydrates
949PROBLEM 27What is the main structural difference between
a.amylose and cellulose?c.amylopectin and glycogen?
b.amylose and amylopectin?d.cellulose and chitin?
1In referring to the sugar found in DNA,it is called 2-deoxyribose. In numbering the sugar in a DNA
molecule,it is because the nonprimed numbers refer to positions on the heterocyclic

amine components.2-deoxyribose22.19Some Naturally Occurring Products
Derived from Carbohydrates
Deoxy sugarsare sugars in which one of the OH groups is replaced by a hydrogen
(deoxymeans Òwithout oxygenÓ). 2-DeoxyriboseÑit is missing the oxygen at the C-2positionÑis an important example of a deoxy sugar. Ribose is the sugar component of
ribonucleic acid (RNA),whereas 2-deoxyribose is the sugar component of deoxyri-

bonucleic acid (DNA). RNA and DNA are 
N-glycosidesÑtheir subunits consist of an
amine bonded to the of the anomeric carbon of ribose or 2-deoxyribose.

The subunits are linked by a phosphate group between C-3 of one sugar and C-5 of the

next sugar (Section27.1).
135a heterocyclicamino baseOOOH
ONPOOOOOOHNPOOOOOOHNa short segment of RNAthe sugar component is D-riboseOOONPOOOOONPOOOOONa short segment of DNAthe sugar component is D-2-deoxyriboseb-positionFFClClCOCOOFFCF3FNNHHlufenuronBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 949
950CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesHEPARIN
Heparin is an anticoagulant that is released toprevent excessive blood clot formation when an
injury occurs. Heparin is a polysaccharide made up of glu-

cosamine,glucuronic acid,and iduronic acid subunits. The C-6

OH groups of the glucosamine subunits and the C-2 OH groups
of the iduronic acid subunits are sulfonated. Some of the amino
groups are sulfonated and some are acetylated. Thus,heparin is

a highly negatively charged molecule,found principally in cells

that line arterial walls. Heparin is widely used clinically as an

anticoagulant.OOO3SNHOSO3HOHOHOHOCH2OSO3OOOOOCH2OSO3CO2CH3CNHOCO2OSO3OheparinO3-D Molecule:GentamicinInamino sugars,one of the OH groups is replaced by an amino group. 
N-Acetyl-glucosamineÑthe subunit of chitin and one of the subunits of certain bacterial cell
walls
Ñis an example of an amino sugar (Sections22.18and 24.9). Some important
antibiotics contain amino sugars. For example,the three subunits of the antibiotic gen-

tamicin are deoxyamino sugars. Notice that the middle subunit is missing the ring oxy-

gen,so it really isn
Õt a sugar.
CHNHCH3CH3HOgentamicinan antibioticNH2NH2OOOHONH2CH3CH3NHOHOL-Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is synthesized in plants and in the livers of most verte-
brates. Humans,monkeys,and guinea pigs do not have the enzymes necessary for the

biosynthesis of vitamin C,so they must obtain the vitamin in their diets. The biosyn-

thesis of vitamin C involves the enzymatic conversion of 
D-glucose into L-gulonicacidÑreminiscent of the last step in the Fischer proof. 
L-Gulonic acid is converted
into a by the enzyme lactonase,and then an enzyme called oxidase oxidizes

the lactone to L-ascorbic acid. The 
L-configuration of ascorbic acid refers to the con-
figuration at C-5,which was C-2 in 
D-glucose.g-lactoneBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 950
Section 22.20Carbohydrates on Cell Surfaces
951Although L-ascorbic acid does not have a carboxylic acid group,it is an acidic com-
pound because the of the C-3 OH group is 4.17. 
L-Ascorbic acid is readily oxidized
to L-dehydroascorbic acid,which is also physiologically active. If the lactone ring is
opened by hydrolysis,all vitamin C activity is lost. Therefore,not much intact vitamin

C survives in food that has been thoroughly cooked. Worse,if the food is cooked in

water and then drained,the water-soluble vitamin is thrown out with the water!
paCH2OHHOH
OHHCH2OHHOH
OOOHOOH oxidizingenzyme reducingenzyme rotate 180lactonaseoxidaseoxidationthe synthesis of L-ascorbic acidHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
COOHHHCO
HOH
OHHOH
HOH
COOHHCH2OHHOH
HHOH
HOH
CH2OHHOCOOHCH2OHHOH
OOOOHHOOL-ascorbic acidvitamin CpKa    4.17a  -lactone
L-dehydroascorbic acidD-glucoseL-gulonic acidL-configurationVITAMIN C
Vitamin C traps radicals formed in aqueous envi-
ronments (Section9.8). It is an antioxidant be-
cause it prevents oxidation reactions by radicals. Not all the

physiological functions of vitamin C are known. What is

known,though,is that vitamin C is required for the synthesis of

collagen,which is the structural protein of skin,tendons,con-

nective tissue,and bone. If vitamin C is not present in the diet

(it is abundant in citrus fruits and tomatoes),lesions appear on
the skin,severe bleeding occurs about the gums,in the joints,
and under the skin,and wounds heal slowly. The disease caused

by a deficiency of vitamin C is known as 
scurvy. British sailorswho shipped out to sea after the late 1700s were required to eat
limes to prevent scurvy. This is how they came to be called

Òlimeys.
ÓScurvy was the first disease to be treated by adjusting
the diet. Scorbutus
is Latin for 
ÒscurvyÓ; ascorbic,therefore,
means Òno scurvy.
ÓPROBLEM 28Explain why the C-3 OH group of vitamin C is more acidic than the C-2 OH group.22.20Carbohydrates on Cell SurfacesThe surfaces of many cells contain short polysaccharide chains that allow the cells to
interact with each other,as well as to interact with invading viruses and bacteria. These

polysaccharides are linked to the cell surface by the reaction of an OH or an 

group of a protein with the anomeric carbon of a cyclic sugar. Proteins bonded to poly-

saccharides are called glycoproteins
. The percentage of carbohydrate in glycoproteins
is variable; some glycoproteins contain as little as 1% carbohydrate by weight,where-

as others contain as much as 80%.NH2BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 951
952CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesType APROTEIND-galactoseL-fucoseN-acetyl-D-glucosaminePROTEIND-galactoseL-fucoseN-acetyl-D-glucosaminePROTEIND-galactoseL-fucoseN-acetyl-D-glucosamineType BD-galactoseType ON-acetyl-D-galactosamineFigure 22.5
Blood type is determined by the nature of the sugar on the surfaces of red blood cells.Fucose is 6-deoxygalactose.Many different types of proteins are glycoproteins. For example,structural proteins
such as collagen,proteins found in mucous secretions,immunoglobulins,follicle-stimu-

lating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone,interferon (an antiviral protein),and

blood plasma proteins are all glycoproteins. One of the functions of the polysaccharide

chain is to act as a receptor site on the cell surface in order to transmit signals from hor-

mones and other molecules across the cell membrane into the cell. The carbohydrates on

the surfaces of cells also serve as points of attachment for other cells,viruses,and toxins.
Carbohydrates on the surfaces of cells provide a way for cells to recognize one an-
other. The interaction between surface carbohydrates has been found to play a role in

many diverse activites,such as infection,the prevention of infection,fertilization,in-

flammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and septic shock,and blood clotting. For

example,the goal of the HIV protease inhibitor drugs is to prevent HIV from recog-

nizing and penetrating cells. The fact that several known antibiotics contain amino

sugars suggests that they function by recognizing target cells. Carbohydrate interac-

tions also are involved in the regulation of cell growth,so changes in membrane gly-

coproteins are thought to be correlated with malignant transformations.Blood type (A,B,AB,or O) is determined by the nature of the sugar bound to the
protein on the outer surfaces of red blood cells. Each type of blood is associated with

a different carbohydrate structure (Figure22.5). Type AB blood has the carbohydrate

structure of both type A and type B.
Antibodiesare proteins that are synthesized by the body in response to a foreign
substance,called an 
antigen. Interaction with the antibody either causes the antigen to
precipitate or flags it for destruction by immune system cells. This is why,for exam-

ple,blood cannot be transferred from one person to another unless the carbohydrate
glycoproteinsO-proteinCH2OHOHOOHONH-proteinCH2OHOHOOHOAU:OKas changed?
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 952
Section 22.21Synthetic Sweeteners
953portions of the donor and acceptor are compatible. Otherwise the donated blood will
be considered a foreign substance.Looking at Figure22.5,we can see why the immune system of type A people rec-
ognizes type B blood as foreign and vice versa. The immune system of people with

type A,B,or AB blood does not,however,recognize type O blood as foreign,because

the carbohydrate in type O blood is also a component of types A,B,and AB blood.

Thus,anyone can accept type O blood,so people with type O blood are called univer-

sal donors. Type AB people can accept types AB,A,B,and O blood,so people with

type AB blood are referred to as universal acceptors.
PROBLEM 29From the nature of the carbohydrate bound to red blood cells,answer the following questions:
a.People with type O blood can donate blood to anyone,but they cannot receive blood
from everyone. From whom can they 
notreceive blood?
b.People with type AB blood can receive blood from anyone,but they cannot give blood
to everyone. To whom can they 
notgive blood?
22.21Synthetic SweetenersFor a molecule to taste sweet,it must bind to a receptor on a taste bud cell of the tongue.
The binding of this molecule causes a nerve impulse to pass from the taste bud to the

brain,where the molecule is interpreted as being sweet. Sugars differ in their degree of

Òsweetness.ÓThe relative sweetness of glucose is 1.00,that of sucrose is 1.45,and that
of fructose,the sweetest of all sugars,is 1.65. Developers of synthetic sweeteners must

consider several factors
Ñsuch as toxicity,stability,and cost
Ñin addition to taste.Saccharin,the first synthetic sweetener,was discovered by Ira Remsen and his stu-
dent Constantine Fahlberg at Johns Hopkins University in 1878. Fahlberg was study-

ing the oxidation of ortho-substituted toluenes in RemsenÕs laboratory when he found
that one of his newly synthesized compounds had an extremely sweet taste. (As

strange as it may seem today,at one time it was common for chemists to taste com-

pounds in order to characterize them.) He called this compound saccharin,and it was

eventually found to be about 300 times sweeter than glucose. Notice that,in spite of its

name,saccharin is 
nota saccharide.Because it has no caloric value,when it became commercially available in 1885,
saccharin became an important substitute for sucrose. The chief nutritional problem in

the West was
Ñand still isÑthe overconsumption of sugar and its consequences:obesi-
ty,heart disease,and dental decay. Saccharin is also important to diabetics,who must

limit their consumption of sucrose and glucose. Although the toxicity of saccharin was

not studied carefully when the compound first became available to the public (our cur-

rent concern with toxicity is a fairly recent development),extensive studies done since
COOOSNHCH3CH2ONHCNH2OOCCH2CHCNHCHCOCH3OONH3CH2ONHSO3saccharindulcinaspartamesodium cyclamateNaIra Remsen (1846Ð1927)was bornin New York. After receiving an M.D.

from Columbia University,he

decided to become a chemist. He

earned a Ph.D. in Germany and then
returned to the United States in 1872

to accept a faculty position at
Williams College. In 1876,he became

a professor of chemistry at the newly

established Johns Hopkins

University,where he initiated the first

center for chemical research in the

United States. He later became the
second president of Johns Hopkins.
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 953
954CHAPTER 22CarbohydratesTHE WONDER OF DISCOVERY
Ira Remsen gave the following account of why he
became a scientist:2He was working as a physi-
cian and came across the statement ÒNitric acid acts upon cop-perÓwhile reading a chemistry book. He decided to see what
Òacts onÓmeant. He poured nitric acid on a penny sitting on a
table. ÒBut what was this wonderful thing which I beheld? The
cent had already changed and it was not small change either. A

greenish blue liquid foamed and fumed over the cent and over

the table. The air in the neighborhood of the performance be-

came dark red. A great colored cloud arose. This was disagree-

able and suffocating
Ñhow should I stop this? I tried to get rid
of the objectionable mess by picking it up and throwing it out of

the window,which I had meanwhile opened. I learned another

fact
Ñnitric acid not only acts upon copper but it acts upon my
fingers. The pain led to another unpremeditated experiment. I
drew my fingers across my trousers and another fact was dis-

covered. Nitric acid also acts upon trousers. Taking everything

else into consideration,that was the most impressive experi-

ment,and,relatively,probably the most expensive experiment I

ever performed. I tell of it even now with interest. It was a reve-

lation to me. It resulted in a desire on my part to learn even

more about that remarkable kind of action. Plainly the only way

to learn about it was to see its results,to experiment,to work in

a laboratory.
Ó2L. R. Summerlin,C. L. Bordford,and J. B. Ealy,
ChemicalDemonstrations,
2nd ed. (Washington,DC:American Chemical
Society,1988).
then have shown saccharin to be a safe sugar substitute. In 1912,saccharin was tem-
porarily banned in the United States,not because of any concern about its toxicity,but

because of a concern that people would miss out on the nutritional benefits of sugar.
Tutorial:
Carbohydrates:
Common Terms
SummaryBioorganic compounds
Ñorganic compounds found in bio-
logical systems
Ñobey the same principles of structure and
reactivity as do small organic molecules. Much of the struc-

ture of bioorganic compounds is for 
molecular recognition
.Carbohydrates
are the most abundant class of compounds
in the biological world. They are polyhydroxy aldehydes

(aldoses) and polyhydroxy ketones (
ketoses
) or compounds
formed by linking up aldoses and ketoses. 
Dand Lnotationsdescribe the configuration of the bottom-most asymmetric

carbon of a monosaccharide; the configurations of the other
carbons are explicit in the common name. Most naturally

occurring sugars are D-sugars. Naturally occurring ketoses
have the ketone group in the 2-position. 
Epimersdiffer in
configuration at only one asymmetric carbon:
D-mannose isthe C-2 epimer of 
D-glucose and D-galactose is the C-4 epimer
of D-glucose.Reduction of an aldose forms one 
alditol; reduction of a
ketose forms two alditols. oxidizes aldoses,but not ke-

toses; Tollens reagent oxidizes both. Aldoses are oxidized to

aldonic acidsor aldaric acids. Aldoses and ketoses react
with three equivalents of phenylhydrazine,forming

osazones. C-2 epimers form identical osazones. The 
KilianiÐFischer synthesisincreases the carbon chain of an aldose by
one carbonÑit forms C-2 epimers. The 
Ruff degradationdecreases the carbon chain by one carbon. The OH groups of

monosaccharides react with acetyl chloride to form esters

and with methyl iodide/silver oxide to form ethers.
The aldehyde or keto group of a 
monosaaccharidereactswith one of its OH groups to form cyclic hemiacetals or

hemiketals:Glucose forms -
D-glucose and -
D-glucose.The is axial when a sugar is shown in a chair con-

formation and down when the sugar is shown in a Haworth
a-positionbaBr2Dulcin¨was the second synthetic sweetener to be discovered (in 1884). Even
though it did not have the bitter,metallic aftertaste associated with saccharin,it never

achieved much popularity. Dulcin
¨was taken off the market in 1951 in response to
questions about its toxicity.
Sodiumcyclamate became a widely used nonnutritive sweetener in the 1950s,but
was banned in the United States some 20 years later in response to two studies that

appeared to show that large amounts of sodium cyclamate cause liver cancer in mice.
Aspartame was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in
1981. About 200 times sweeter than sucrose,aspartame is sold under the trade name

NutraSweet¨(Section23.8). Because NutraSweet
¨contains a phenylalanine subunit,
it should not be used by people with the genetic disease known as PKU (Section25.6).
The fact that these four synthetic sweeteners have such different structures,all of
which are very different from those of monosaccharides,indicates that the sensation of

sweetness is not induced by a single molecular shape.BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 954
Summary of Reactions955projection; the is equatorial when a sugar is
shown in a chair conformation and up when the sugar is

shown in a Haworth projection. At equilibrium,there is more
-D-glucose than -
D-glucose. -
D-Glucose and -
D-glucoseare anomersÑthey differ in configuration only at the carbon
(anomeric carbon) that was the carbonyl carbon in the open-
chain form. Anomers have different physical properties. Six-

membered-ring sugars are pyranoses; five-membered-ring
sugars are furanoses. The most abundant monosaccharide in
nature is D-glucose. All the OH groups in -
D-glucose are inequatorial positions. A slow change in optical rotation to an

equilibrium value is known as 
mutarotation
.The cyclic hemiacetal (or hemiketal) can react with an
alcohol to form an acetal (or ketal),called a 
glycoside. Ifthe name Òpyranose
Óor ÒfuranoseÓis used,the acetal is
called a pyranosideor a furanoside. The bond between the
anomeric carbon and the alkoxy oxygen is called a

glycosidic bond. The preference for the axial position by
certain substituents bonded to the anomeric carbon is called

the anomeric effect. If a sugar has an aldehyde,ketone,
hemiacetal,or hemiketal group,it is a reducing sugar.
Disaccharidesconsist of two monosaccharide subunits
hooked together by an acetal linkage. Maltose has an
bbaabb-positioncellobiose has a The most common disaccharide is sucrose; it
consists of a D-glucose subunit and a 
D-fructose subunit
linked by their anomeric carbons.
Polysaccharides
contain as few as 10 or as many as
several thousand monosaccharide units joined together by

glycosidic linkages. Starch is composed of amylose and

amylopectin. Amylose has unbranched chains of 
D-glucoseunits joined by linkages. Amylopectin,too,

has chains of D-glucose units joined by 
linkages,but it also has linkages that create

branches. Glycogen is similar to amylopectin,but has more

branches. Cellulose has unbranched chains of 
D-glucose unitsjoined by linkages. The cause

amylose to form a helix; the allow the molecules

of cellulose to form intramolecular hydrogen bonds.The surfaces of many cells contain short polysaccharide
chains that allow the cells to interact with each other. These

polysaccharides are linked to the cell surface by protein

groups. Proteins bonded to polysaccharides are called

glycoproteins
.b-linkagesa-linkagesb-1,4-glycosidica-1,6-glycosidica-1,4-glycosidica-1,4-glycosidicsidic linkage.B-1,4-glyco-A-1,4-glycosidic linkage;Summary of Reactions1.Reduction (Section22.5).
2.Oxidation (Section22.5).
a.c.
b.d.
HNO3(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nCOOHCOOHAg, NH3HOAg(CHOH)nCH2OHCO(CHOH)nCH2OHCH2OHCOO
CHOH2 BrBr2H2O(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nCH2OHCOOHAg, NH3HO(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nAgCH2OHCOOH2Pd/C(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nCH2OHCH2OH1. NaBH42. H3O(CHOH)nCH2OHCO(CHOH)nCH2OHCH2OHCH
2OHCHOHBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 955
956CHAPTER 22Carbohydrates3.Enolization (Section22.5).
4.Osazone formation (Section22.6).
5.Chain elongation:the Kiliani
ÐFischer synthesis (Section22.7).
6.Chain shortening:the Ruff degradation (Section22.8).
7.Acylation (Section22.12).
8.Alkylation (Section22.12).
9.Acetal (and ketal) formation (Section22.13).
HClROHOHCH2OHHOHOOHOORCH2OHHOHOOHOORCH2OHHOHOOHOOHCH2OHOHOHOHOOCH3CH2OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3OCH3IexcessAg2OOHCH2OHOHOHOHOOCCH3CH2OCCH3OCCH3OCH3COCH3COCH3COCCH3excesspyridineOOOOOOOCO22. Ca(OH)23. H2O2, Fe3(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)n  1CH2OHHCO
1. Br2, H2O2. H2, Pd/BaSO43. H3O(CHOH)nCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)n  1CH2OHHCO
1. NaCN/HCl
3 NH2NH(CHOH)nCHOHCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nCCH2OHHCNNHC
6H5NNHC6H5NH32 H2ONH2catalyticHHOH2O(CHOH)nCHOHCH2OHHCO
(CHOH)nCH2OHCOCH2OH(CHOH)nCH2OHCOH
HCOH
H2OHOBRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 956
Problems957Key Terms
aldaric acid (p.929)
alditol (p.926)

aldonic acid (p.928)

aldose (p.923)

amino sugar (p.950)

anomeric carbon (p.935)

anomeric effect (p.941)

anomers (p.935)

bioorganic compound (p.921)

carbohydrate (p.921)

complex carbohydrate (p.922)

deoxy sugar (p.949)

disaccharide (p.922)

epimers (p.925)

furanose (p.935)
furanoside (p.939)
glycoprotein (p.957)

glycoside (p.939)

N-glycoside (p.940)
glycosidic bond (p.939)
linkage (p.943)
linkage (p.944)
Haworth projection (p.935)

heptose (p.923)

hexose (p.923)

ketose (p.923)

KilianiÐFischer synthesis (p.931)
molecular recognition (p.921)

monosaccharide (p.922)

mutarotation (p.935)
b-1,4-glycosidica-1,4-glycosidicnonreducing sugar (p.000)
oligosaccharide (p.000)

osazone (p.000)

oxocarbenium ion (p.939)

pentose (p.923)

polysaccharide (p.922)

pyranose (p.935)

pyranoside (p.939)

reducing sugar (p.941)

Ruff degradation (p.931)

simple carbohydrate (p.922)

tetrose (p.923)

triose (p.923)
Problems
30.Give the product or products that are obtained when 
D-galactose reacts with the following:
a.nitric acid

b.Tollens reagent

c.
d.three equivalents of phenylhydrazine

e.in water

f.
g.product of reaction e 
31.Identify the following sugars:
a.An aldopentose that is not 
D-arabinose forms D-arabinitol when it is reduced with b.A sugar forms the same osazone as 
D-galactose with phenylhydrazine,but it is not oxidized by an aqueous solution of 
c.A sugar that is not 
D-altrose forms D-altraric acid when it reacts with nitric acid.d.A ketose,when reduced with forms 
D-altritol and D-allitol.32.Answer the following questions about the eight aldopentoses:
a.Which are enantiomers?

b.Which give identical osazones?

c.Which form an optically active compound when oxidized with nitric acid?
33.The reaction of 
D-ribose with an equivalent of methanol plus HCl forms four products. Give the structures of the products.
34.Determine the structure of 
D-galactose,using arguments similar to those used by Fischer to prove the structure of 
D-glucose.35.Dr. Isent T. Sweet isolated a monosaccharide and determined that it had a molecular weight of 150. Much to his surprise,he f
oundthat it was not optically active. What is the structure of the monosaccharide?
36.The spectrum of 
D-glucose in exhibits two high-frequency (low-field) doublets. What is responsible for these
doublets?37.Treatment with sodium borohydride converts aldose A into an optically inactive alditol. Ruff degradation of A forms B,whose
alditol is optically inactive. Ruff degradation of B forms 
D-glyceraldehyde. Identify A and B.
38.D-Glucuronic acid is found widely in plants and animals. One of its functions is to detoxify poisonous HO-containing compoundsby reacting with them in the liver to form glucuronides. Glucuronides are water soluble and therefore readily excreted. After

ingestion of a poison such as turpentine,morphine,or phenol,the glucuronides of these compounds are found in the urine. Give

the structure of the glucuronide formed by the reaction of -
D-glucuronic acid and phenol.bD2O1H NMRH2PdC,Br2.NaBH4.H2O2Fe3,(above)Ca(OH)2,ethanolHClBr2H2PdCAuthor:These terms are boldface in text.
Add key terms? Or make lightface in text?
oligosaccharides (p.922)
photosynthesis (p.922)

reducing sugar (p.941)
Antibody (p.952)
antigen (p.952)
Author:Not bold in
text.Make bold
there? Delete here?BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 957
anhydro form of D-idoseHOOHOHCH2OO958CHAPTER 22Carbohydrates39.Hyaluronic acid,a component of connective tissue,is the fluid that lubricates the joints. It is an alternating polymer of 
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and D-glucuronic acid joined by linkages. Draw a short segment of hyaluronic acid.
40.In order to synthesize 
D-galactose,Professor Amy Losse went to the stockroom to get some 
D-lyxose to use as a starting material.She found that the labels had fallen off the bottles containing 
D-lyxose and D-xylose. How could she determine which bottle
contains D-lyxose?41.When 
D-fructose is dissolved in and the solution is made basic,the 
D-fructose recovered from the solution has an average of
1.7 deuterium atoms attached to carbon per molecule. Show the mechanism that accounts for the incorporation of these deuterium

atoms into D-fructose.42.A 
D-aldopentose is oxidized by nitric acid to an optically active aldaric acid. A Ruff degradation of the aldopentose leads to a
monosaccharide that is oxidized by nitric acid to an optically inactive aldaric acid. Identify the 
D-aldopentose.43.How many aldaric acids are obtained from the 16 aldohexoses?

44.Calculate the percentages of -
D-glucose and -
D-glucose present at equilibrium from the specific rotations of -
D-glucose,-D-glucose,and the equilibrium mixture. Compare your values with those given in Section22.10. (
Hint:The specific rotation of
the mixture equals the specific rotation of -
D-glucose times the fraction of glucose present in the plus the specific rotation
of -D-glucose times the fraction of glucose present in the )
45.Predict whether 
D-altrose exists preferentially as a pyranose or a furanose. (
Hint:The most stable arrangement for a five-membered
ring is for all the adjacent substituents to be trans.)46.Propose a mechanism for the rearrangement that converts an into an (Section22.6).
47.A disaccharide forms a silver mirror with Tollens reagent and is hydrolyzed by a When the disaccharide is treated
with excess methyl iodide in the presence of (a reaction that converts all the OH groups to groups) and then hy-

drolyzed with water under acidic conditions,2,3,4-tri-
O-methylmannose and 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methylgalactose are formed.a.Draw the structure of the disaccharide.

b.What is the function of 
48.All the glucose units in dextran have six-membered rings. When a sample of dextran is treated with methyl iodide and silver 
oxideand the product is hydrolyzed under acidic conditions,the products obtained are 2,3,4,6-tetra-
O-methyl-D-glucose,2,4,6-tri-
O-methyl-D-glucose,2,3,4-tri-
O-methyl-D-glucose,and 2,4-di-
O-methyl-D-glucose. Draw a short segment of dextran.
49.When a pyranose is in the chair conformation in which the group and the C-1 OH group are both in the axial position,the
two groups can react to form an acetal. This is called the anhydro form of the sugar. (It has lost water.) The anhydro form of
D-idose is shown here. In an aqueous solution at 100
¡C,about 80% of 
D-idose exists in the anhydro form. Under the same condi-
tions,only about 0.1% of 
D-glucose exists in the anhydro form. Explain.
CH2OHAg2O?OCH3Ag2Ob-glycosidase.N    hemoglobin
rearrangementHOH
OHHOH
HOH
CH2OHHHCCOHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2OHCH2NH    hemoglobin
a-aminoketonea-hydroxyimineb-form.ba-formababaD2Ob-1,3-glycosidicOHOHHHOHOHOHHCOOHH-D-glucuronic acid50.Devise a method to convert 
D-glucose into D-allose.AU:Please check changes
AU:OKas changed?
BRUI22-919_958r2  29-03-2003  1:28 PM  Page 958
23Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins959oxidized glutathioneThethree kinds of polymers that are prevalent in nature are
polysaccharides,proteins,and nucleic acids. You have al-

ready learned about polysaccharides,which are naturally
occurring polymers of sugar subunits (Section22.18),and nucle-

ic acids are covered in Chapter27. We will now look at proteins

and the structurally similar,but shorter,peptides. 
Peptides
andproteins
are polymers of amino acidslinked together by amide
bonds. The repeating units are called 
amino acid residues
.Amino acid polymers can be composed of any number of monomers.
A dipeptidecontains two amino acid residues,a 
tripeptidecontains three,an oligopeptidecontains three to 10,and a 
polypeptidecontains many amino
acid residues. Proteins are naturally occurring polypeptides that are made up of 40 to

4000 amino acid residues.From the structure of an amino acid,we can see that the name is not very precise.
The compounds commonly called amino acids are more precisely called amino-

carboxylic acids.Proteins and peptides serve many functions in biological systems. Some protect or-
ganisms from their environment or impart strength to certain biological structures.

Hair,horns,hooves,feathers,fur,and the tough outer layer of skin are all composed

largely of a 
structural protein
called keratin. Collagen,another structural protein,is a
major component of bones,muscles,and tendons. Some proteins have other protective

functions. Snake venoms and plant toxins,for example,protect their owners from

other species,blood-clotting proteins protect the vascular system when it is injured,
OOOO
CH   -aminocarboxylic acidan amino acidRCOHNHCHC
RNHCHCRNHCHCRamino acids are linked together by amide bondsamide bondsNH3a-BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 959
960CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteinsand antibodies and protein antibiotics protect us from disease. A group of proteins
called enzymescatalyzes the chemical reactions that occur in living systems,and
some of the hormones that regulate these reactions are peptides. Proteins are also re-

sponsible for many physiological functions,such as the transport and storage of oxy-

gen in the body and the contraction of muscles.23.1Classification and Nomenclature of Amino Acids
The structures of the 20 most common naturally occurring amino acids and the fre-
quency with which each occurs in proteins are shown in Table23.1. Other amino acids

occur in nature,but only infrequently. All amino acids except proline contain a primary

amino group. Proline contains a secondary amino group incorporated into a five-mem-

bered ring. The amino acids differ only in the substituent (R) attached to the 

The wide variation in these substituents (called side chains) is what gives proteins their

great structural diversity and,as a consequence,their great functional diversity.
a-carbon.Table 23.1The Most Common Naturally Occurring Amino Acids 
The amino acids are shown in the form that predominates at physiological pH(7.3)
.Average relative
abundance
FormulaNameAbbreviationsin proteins
Aliphatic side chainamino acidsGlycineGlyG7.5%
AlanineAlaA9.0%

Valine
*ValV6.9%
Leucine*LeuL7.5%
Isoleucine*IleI4.6%
Hydroxy-containingamino acidsSerineSerS7.1%
Threonine*ThrT6.0%
*Essential amino acidsONH3CHCOCH3CHOHONH3CHCOHOCH2ONH3CHCOCH3CH2CHCH3ONH3CHCOCH3CHCH2CH3ONH3CHCOCH3CHCH3ONH3CHCOCH3HCHCO
ONH33-D Molecules:Common naturally occurring
amino acidsBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 960
Section 23.1Classification and Nomenclature of Amino Acids
961Sulfur-containing
amino acidsCysteineCysC2.8%
Methionine*MetM1.7%
Acidic amino acidsAspartateAspD5.5%
(aspartic acid)GlutamateGluE6.2%
(glutamic acid)Amides of acidicamino acidsAsparagineAsnN4.4%
GlutamineGlnQ3.9%
Basic amino acidsLysine
*LysK7.0%
Arginine
*ArgR4.7%
Benzene-containingamino acidsPhenylalanine
*PheF3.5%
TyrosineTyrY3.5%
Heterocylic
amino acidsProlineProP4.6%
*Essential amino acidsOCONNH3OCHCOCH2HONH3OCHCOCH2NH3OCHCONH2H2NCNHCH2CH2CH2NH3OCHCOH3NCH2CH2CH2CH2NH3OOCHCOH2NCCH2CH2NH3OOCHCOH2NCCH2NH3CHCOOCCH2CH2OOOONH3CHCOOCCH2ONH3CHCOCH3SCH2CH2ONH3CHCOHSCH2Average relative
abundance
FormulaNameAbbreviationsin proteins
Table 23.1(continued)
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 961
Heterocyclic
amino acids
(continued)Histidine*HisH2.1%
Tryptophan
*TrpW1.1%
*Essential amino acidsONH3CHCOCH2NHOCHCOCH2NNHNH3962CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsThe amino acids are almost always called by their common names. Often,the name
tells you something about the amino acid. For example,glycine got its name because

of its sweet taste (
glykos
is Greek for ÒsweetÓ),and valine,like valeric acid,has five
carbon atoms. Asparagine was first found in asparagus,and tyrosine was isolated from

cheese (tyros
is Greek for ÒcheeseÓ).Dividing the amino acids into classes makes them easier to learn. The aliphatic side
chain amino acids include glycine,the amino acid in which and four amino acids

with alkyl side chains. Alanine is the amino acid with a methyl side chain,and valine has

an isopropyl side chain. Can you guess which amino acidÑleucine or isoleucineÑhas an

isobutyl side chain? If you gave the obvious answer,you guessed incorrectly. Isoleucine

does nothave an ÒisoÓgroup; it is leucine that has an isobutyl substituentÑisoleucine has
a sec-butyl substituent. Each of the amino acids has both a three-letter abbreviation (the
first three letters of the name in most cases) and a single-letter abbreviation.
Two amino acid side chainsÑserine and threonineÑcontain alcohol groups. Serine
is an HO-substituted alanine and threonine has a branched ethanol substituent. There

are also two sulfur-containing amino acids:Cysteine is an HS-substituted alanine and

methionine has a 2-methylthioethyl substituent.There are two acidic amino acids (amino acids with two carboxylic acid groups):
aspartate and glutamate. Aspartate is a carboxy-substituted alanine and glutamate has

one more methylene group than aspartate. (If their carboxyl groups are protonated,

they are called aspartic acid and glutamic acid,respectively.) Two amino acidsÑ

asparagine and glutamineÑare amides of the acidic amino acids; asparagine is the
amide of aspartate and glutamine is the amide of glutamate. Notice that the obvious

one-letter abbreviations cannot be used for these four amino acids because A and G are

used for alanine and glycine. Aspartic acid and glutamic acid are abbreviated D and E,

and asparagine and glutamine are abbreviated N and Q.
There are two basic amino acids (amino acids with two basic nitrogen-containing
groups):lysine and arginine. Lysine has an group and arginine has a -guanidino

group. At physiological pH,these groups are protonated. The and can remind you how

many methylene groups each amino acid has.
OH3NNH3NH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCOH2NCCH2CH2CH2CHCONHONH2lysinean   -amino groupargininea   -guanidino groupdd-aminoRH,glycineleucineAverage relative
abundance
FormulaNameAbbreviationsin proteins
Table 23.1(continued)
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 962
NHindoleSection 23.1Classification and Nomenclature of Amino Acids
963Two amino acids
Ñphenylalanine and tyrosine
Ñcontain benzene rings. As its name
indicates,phenylalanine is phenyl-substituted alanine. Tyrosine is phenylalanine with

a para
-hydroxy substituent.Proline,histidine,and tryptophan are heterocyclic amino acids. Proline has its nitro-
gen incorporated into a five-membered ring
Ñit is the only amino acid that contains a
secondary amino group. Histidine is an imidazole-substituted alanine. Imidazole is an

aromatic compound because it is cyclic and planar and has three pairs of delocalized 

electrons (Section 21.11). The of a protonated imidazole ring is 6.0,so the ring will

be protonated in acidic solutions and nonprotonated in basic solutions (Section23.3).
Tryptophan is an indole-substituted alanine (Section21.11). Like imidazole,indole is
an aromatic compound. Because the lone pair on the nitrogen atom of indole is need-

ed for the compound
Õs aromaticity,indole is a very weak base. (The of protonated
indole is ) Therefore,the ring nitrogen in tryptophan is never protonated under

physiological conditions.Ten amino acids are 
essential amino acids. We humans must obtain these 10
essential amino acidsfrom our diets because we either cannot synthesize them at all
or cannot synthesize them in adequate amounts. For example,we must have a dietary

source of phenylalanine because we cannot synthesize benzene rings. However,we do

not need tyrosine in our diets,because we can synthesize the necessary amounts from

phenylalanine. The essential amino acids are denoted by red asterisks (
*) inTable23.1. Although humans can synthesize arginine,it is needed for growth in

greater amounts than can be synthesized. So arginine is an essential amino acid for

children,but a nonessential amino acid for adults. Not all proteins contain the same

amino acids. Bean protein is deficient in methionine,for example,and wheat protein is

deficient in lysine. They are 
incompleteproteins:They contain too little of one or more
essential amino acids to support growth. Therefore,a balanced diet must contain pro-

teins from different sources.
Dietary protein is hydrolyzed in the body to individual amino acids. Some of these
amino acids are used to synthesize proteins needed by the body,some are broken down

further to supply energy to the body,and some are used as starting materials for the

synthesis of nonprotein compounds the body needs,such as adrenaline,thyroxine,and

melanin (Section25.6).
PROBLEM 1a.Explain why,when the imidazole ring of histidine is protonated,the double-bonded
nitrogen is the nitrogen that accepts the proton.b.Explain why,when the guanidino group of arginine is protonated,the double-bonded
nitrogen is the nitrogen that accepts the proton.2 HNH2H2NCNHCH2CH2CH2CHCOONHNH3H2NCNHCH2CH2CH2CHCOONH22 HHNNH
NHNNH2CH2CHCOONH3CH2CHCOO2.4.paHNNHH
NHNprotonated imidazoleimidazole papaspartatelysineTutorial:
Basic nitrogens in histidine
and arginineBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 963
964CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins23.2Configuration of Amino AcidsThe of all the naturally occurring amino acids except glycine is an asymmet-
ric carbon. Therefore,19 of the 20 amino acids listed in Table23.1can exist as enan-

tiomers. The Dand Lnotation used for monosaccharides (Section22.2) is also used for
amino acids. The 
Dand Lisomers of monosaccharides and amino acids are defined the
same way. Thus,an amino acid drawn in a Fischer projection with the carboxyl group

on the top and the R group on the bottom of the vertical axis is a 
D-amino acidif theamino group is on the right and an 
L-amino acidif the amino group is on the left. Un-
like monosaccharides,where the 
Disomer is the one found in nature,most amino acids
found in nature have the 
Lconfiguration. To date,
D-amino acid residues have been
found only in a few peptide antibiotics and in some small peptides attached to the cell

walls of bacteria.
Why D-sugars and L-amino acids? While it makes no difference which isomer nature
ÒselectedÓto be synthesized,it is important that the same isomer be synthesized by all
organisms. For example,if mammals ended up having 
L-amino acids,then 
L-aminoacids would need to be the isomers synthesized by the organisms upon which mammals

depend for food.CHCH2OHOOHHCORONH3HCHCH2OHOHHOCOROHH3ND-glyceraldehydeD-amino acidL-glyceraldehydeL-amino acida-carbonAMINO ACIDS AND DISEASEThe Chamorro people of Guam have a high inci-
dence of a syndrome that resembles amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) with elements of Parkinson
Õs diseaseand dementia. This syndrome developed during World War II

when,as a result of food shortages,the tribe ate large quantities
of Cycas circinalis
seeds. These seeds contain -methylamino-
L-alanine,an amino acid that binds to glutamate receptors.
When monkeys are given -methylamino-
L-alanine,they de-
velop some of the features of this syndrome. There is hope that,

by studying the mechanism of action of -methylamino-
L-alanine,we may gain an understanding of how ALS and
Parkinson
Õs disease arise.bbbalaninean amino acidPROBLEM 2a.Which isomer
Ñ(R)-alanine or (S)-alanineÑis D-alanine?b.Which isomer
Ñ(R)-aspartate or (S)-aspartateÑis D-aspartate?c.Can a general statement be made relating 
Rand Sto Dand L?PROBLEM 3Which amino acids in Table23.1have more than one asymmetric carbon?
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 964
Section 23.3AcidÐBase Properties of Amino Acids
965Recall from the HendersonÐHasselbalch
equation (Section1.20) that the acidic

form predominates if the pH of the solu-

tion is less than the of the com-

pound and the basic form predominates

if the pH of the solution is greater than

the of the compound.
pKapKaTable 23.2The Values of Amino Acids
pKaAmino acid-COOH-side chain
Alanine2.349.69
ÑArginine2.179.0412.48

Asparagine2.028.84
ÑAspartic acid2.099.823.86

Cysteine1.9210.468.35

Glutamic acid2.199.674.25

Glutamine2.179.13
ÑGlycine2.349.60
ÑHistidine1.829.176.04

Isoleucine2.369.68
ÑLeucine2.369.60
ÑLysine2.188.9510.79

Methionine2.289.21
ÑPhenylalanine2.169.18
ÑProline1.9910.60
ÑSerine2.219.15
ÑThreonine2.639.10
ÑTryptophan2.389.39
ÑTyrosine2.209.1110.07

Valine2.329.62
ÑNH3 AApKapKapKa23.3AcidÐBase Properties of Amino Acids
Every amino acid has a carboxyl group and an amino group,and each group can exist
in an acidic form or a basic form,depending on the pH of the solution in which the

amino acid is dissolved. The carboxyl groups of the amino acids have values of

approximately 2,and the protonated amino groups have values near 9

(Table23.2). Both groups,therefore,will be in their acidic forms in a very acidic solu-

tion At the pH of the solution is greater than the of the car-

boxyl group,but less than the of the protonated amino group. The carboxyl group,

therefore,will be in its basic form and the amino group will be in its acidic form. In a

strongly basic solution both groups will be in their basic forms.
Notice that an amino acid can never exist as an uncharged compound,regardless of
the pH of the solution. To be uncharged,an amino acid would have to lose a proton

from an group with a of about 9 before it would lose a proton from a COOH

group with a of about 2. This clearly is impossible:A weak acid cannot be more

acidic than a strong acid.Therefore,at physiological pH (7.3) an amino acid exists as a

dipolar ion,called a 
zwitterion. A zwitterionis a compound that has a negative charge
papaNH3HRCHCOHR
a zwitterionpH  7CHCO
HROOONH2CHCO
pH  0pH 
 11NH3NH3(pH11),papapH7,(pH0).papaBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 965
966CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteinson one atom and a positive charge on a nonadjacent atom. (The name comes from
zwitter,German for 
ÒhermaphroditeÓor Òhybrid.Ó)A few amino acids have side chains with ionizable hydrogens (Table23.2). The
protonated imidazole side chain of histidine,for example,has a of 6.04. Histidine,

therefore,can exist in four different forms,and the form that predominates depends on

the pH of the solution.PROBLEM 4Why are the carboxylic acid groups of the amino acids so much more acidic 
than a carboxylic acid such as acetic acid PROBLEM 5SOLVED
Draw the form in which each of the following amino acids predominantly exists at physio-
logical pH (7.3):a.aspartic acidc.glutaminee.arginine
b.histidined.lysinef.tyrosine
SOLUTION TO 5a
Both carboxyl groups are in their basic forms because the pH is
greater than their . The protonated amino group is in its acidic form because the pH

is less than its PROBLEM 6Draw the form in which glutamic acid predominantly exists in a solution with the follow-

ing pH:a.b.c.d.
PROBLEM 7a.Why is the of the glutamic acid side chain greater than the of the aspartic acid
side chain?b.Why is the of the arginine side chain greater than the of the lysine side chain?
23.4The Isoelectric PointThe isoelectric point(pI) of an amino acid is the pH at which it has no net charge. In
other words,it is the pH at which the amount of positive charge on an amino acid

exactly balances the amount of negative charge:
pI (isoelectric point)pH at which there is no net chargepapapapapH11pH6pH3pH0NH3OOOCCH2CHCOpa.paÕs(pa4.76)?(pa2)paNH3NH3NH3HNNH
CH2CHCOHHNNH
CH2CHCONNH
CH2CHCONNH
CH2CHCONH2OOOO
pH  0pH 
 4pH 
 8pH 
 12histidineBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 966
Section 23.4The Isoelectric Point
967Recall from the Henderson
ÐHasselbalchequation that when , half the

group is in its acidic form and half is in

its basic form (Section1.20).
pHpKaAn amino acid will be positively chargedif the pH of the solution is less than the
pI of the amino acid and will be nega-
tively charged if the pH of the solution
is greater than the pI of the amino acid.
The pI of an amino acid that does 
nothave an ionizable side chain
Ñsuch as alanineÑis midway between its two values. This is because at half the molecules

have a negatively charged carboxyl group and half have an uncharged carboxyl group,

and at half the molecules have a positively charged amino group and half

have an uncharged amino group. As the pH increases from 2.34,the carboxyl group of

more molecules becomes negatively charged; as the pH decreases from 9.69,the amino

group of more molecules becomes positively charged. Therefore,at the average of the

two values,the number of negatively charged groups equals the number of

positively charged groups.
The pI of an amino acid that hasan ionizable side chain is the average of the 
values of the similarly ionizing groups (a positively charged group ionizing to an un-

charged group or an uncharged group ionizing to a negatively charged group). For ex-

ample,the pI of lysine is the average of the values of the two groups that are

positively charged in their acidic form and uncharged in their basic form. The pI of

glutamate,on the other hand,is the average of the values of the two groups that

are uncharged in their acidic form and negatively charged in their basic form.
PROBLEM 8Explain why the pI of lysine is the average of the values of its two protonated amino
groups.PROBLEM 9Calculate the pI of each of the following amino acids:
a.asparagineb.argininec.serine
PROBLEM 10a.Which amino acid has the lowest pI value?

b.Which amino acid has the highest pI value?

c.Which amino acid has the greatest amount of negative charge at 

d.Which amino acid
Ñglycine or methionineÑhas a greater negative charge at 
PROBLEM 11Explain why the pI values of tyrosine and cysteine cannot be determined by the method
just described.pH6.20?pH6.20?papapapaNH3O6.02pI2.34   9.692CH3CHCOH12.032pKa  9.69pKa  2.34alaninepapH9.69,pH2.34,paNH3NH3pKa  9.67pKa  8.95pKa  2.19pKa  2.18pKa  4.25pKa  10.79O9.87pI8.95    10.792H3NCH2CH2CH2CH2CHCOH19.742OO3.22pI2.19   4.252HOCCH2CH2CHCOH6.442lysineglutamic acid
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 967
968CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins23.5Separation of Amino AcidsElectrophoresis
A mixture of amino acids can be separated by several different techniques.
Electrophoresis
separates amino acids on the basis of their pI values. A few drops of
a solution of an amino acid mixture are applied to the middle of a piece of filter paper

or to a gel. When the paper or the gel is placed in a buffered solution between two elec-

trodes and an electric field is applied,an amino acid with a pI greater than the pH of

the solution will have an overall positive charge and will migrate toward the cathode

(the negative electrode). The farther the amino acid
Õs pI is from the pH of the buffer,
the more positive the amino acid will be and the farther it will migrate toward the

cathode in a given amount of time. An amino acid with a pI less than the pH of the

buffer will have an overall negative charge and will migrate toward the anode (the pos-

itive electrode). If two molecules have the same charge,the larger one will move more

slowly during electrophoresis because the same charge has to move a greater mass.
Since amino acids are colorless,how can we detect that they have been separated?
When amino acids are heated with ninhydrin,they form a colored product. After elec-

trophoretic separation of the amino acids,the filter paper is sprayed with ninhydrin

and dried in a warm oven. Most amino acids form a purple product. The number of dif-

ferent kinds of amino acids in the mixture is determined by the number of colored

spots on the filter paper (Figure23.1). The individual amino acids are identified by

their location on the paper compared with a standard.NH3NH3NH3NH2OCCH2CHCOCH3CHCOH2NCNHCH2CH2CH2CHCOOOOO
cathodeanodeaspartatepl  2.98alaninepl  6.02argininepl  10.76Figure 23.1
Arginine, alanine, and aspartic acid separated by electrophoresis at pH
5.Tutorial:
Electrophoresis and pIOORan aminoacidRH2NCHCOONCH
OOHOHNCHR
OHOOOOOOOOOOHCO
2H2OH2OOCOmechanism for the reaction of an amino acid with ninhydrin to form a colored productOH2ONCHR
HORCHNH2ninhydrinThe mechanism for formation of the colored product is as shown,omitting the
mechanisms for the steps involving dehydration,imine formation,and imine hydroly-

sis. (These mechanisms are shown in Sections18.6and 18.7.)
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 968
Section 23.5Separation of Amino Acids
969ChromatographyLeuAla
Glumost polar amino acidleast polar amino acidoriginFigure 23.2
Separation of glutamate, alanine,and leucine by paper
chromatography.
Movie:Column chromatographyPaper Chromatography and Thin-Layer Chromatography
Paper chromatography
once played an important role in biochemical analysis be-
cause it provided a method for separating amino acids using very simple equipment.

Although more modern techniques are now more commonly used,we will describe

the principles behind paper chromatography because many of the same principles are

employed in modern separation techniques.
The technique of paper chromatography separates amino acids on the basis of po-
larity. A few drops of a solution of an amino acid mixture are applied to the bottom of

a strip of filter paper. The edge of the paper is then placed in a solvent (typically a mix-

ture of water,acetic acid,and butanol). The solvent moves up the paper by capillary

action,carrying the amino acids with it. Depending on their polarities,the amino acids

have different affinities for the mobile (solvent) and stationary (paper) phases and

therefore travel up the paper at different rates. The more polar the amino acid,the

more strongly it is adsorbed onto the relatively polar paper. The less polar amino acids

travel up the paper more rapidly,since they have a greater affinity for the mobile

phase. Therefore,when the paper is developed with ninhydrin,the colored spot closest

to the origin is the most polar amino acid and the spot farthest away from the origin is

the least polar amino acid (Figure23.2).
OOOOOOONOOOH2OONpurple-colored productH2OHOHThe most polar amino acids are those with charged side chains,the next most polar
are those with side chains that can form hydrogen bonds,and the least polar are those

with hydrocarbon side chains. For amino acids with hydrocarbon side chains,the larg-

er the alkyl group,the less polar the amino acid. In other words,leucine is less polar

than valine.
Paper chromatography has largely been replaced by 
thin-layer chromatography
(TLC). Similar to paper chromatography,TLC differs from it in that TLC uses a plate

with a coating of solid material instead of filter paper. The physical property on which

the separation is based depends on the solid material and the solvent chosen for the

mobile phase.PROBLEM 12A mixture of seven amino acids (glycine,glutamate,leucine,lysine,alanine,isoleucine,
and aspartate) is separated by TLC. Explain why only six spots show up when the chro-

matographic plate is sprayed with ninhydrin and heated.BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 969
970CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsWATER SOFTENERS:
EXAMPLESOF CATION-

EXCHANGE CHROMATOGRAPHY
Water softeners contain a column with a cation-exchange resin
that has been flushed with concentrated sodium chloride. In

Section17.13,we saw that the presence of calcium and magne-
sium ions in water is what causes the water to be 
Òhard.ÓWhenwater passes through the column,the resin binds magnesium

and calcium ions more tightly than it binds sodium ions. In this
way,the water softener removes magnesium and calcium ions

from water,replacing them with sodium ions. The resin must be

recharged from time to time by flushing it with concentrated

sodium chloride to replace the bound magnesium and calcium

ions with sodium ions.SO3 NaSO3 NaSO3 NaSO3 NaSO3 NaCHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH2CHCH
2CHCH2CH2CHCH2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCHCH
2CHFigure 23.3
A section of a cation-exchangeresin. This particular resin is called
Dowex50.
¨Cations bind most strongly
to cation-exchange resins.
Anions bind most strongly
to anion-exchange resins.
Ion-Exchange Chromatography
Electrophoresis and thin-layer chromatography are analytical separations
Ñsmallamounts of amino acids are separated for analysis. Preparative separation,in which

larger amounts of amino acids are separated for use in subsequent processes,can be

achieved using 
ion-exchange chromatography
. This technique employs a column
packed with an insoluble resin. A solution of a mixture of amino acids is loaded onto

the top of the column and eluted with a buffer. The amino acids separate because they

flow through the column at different rates,as explained below.
The resin is a chemically inert material with charged side chains. One commonly
used resin is a copolymer of styrene and divinylbenzene with negatively charged sul-

fonic acid groups on some of the benzene rings (Figure23.3).If a mixture of lysine

and glutamate in a solution with a pH of 6 were loaded onto the column,glutamate

would travel down the column rapidly because its negatively charged side chain

would be repelled by the negatively charged sulfonic acid groups of the resin. The

positively charged side chain of lysine,on the other hand,would cause that amino

acid to be retained on the column. This kind of resin is called a 
cation-exchangeresin
because it exchanges the counterions of the groups for the positively
charged species that are added to the column. In addition,the relatively nonpolar

nature of the column causes it to retain nonpolar amino acids longer than polar amino

acids. Resins with positively charged groups are called 
anion-exchange resins
because they impede the flow of anions by exchanging their negatively charged coun-

terions for negatively charged species that are added to the column. A common anion-

exchange resin (Dowex
¨1) has groups in place of the 
groups in Figure23.3.
SO3    NaCH2N(CH3)3ClSO3 NaAn amino acid analyzeris an instrument that automates ion-exchange chromatog-
raphy. When a solution of an amino acid mixture passes through the column of an

amino acid analyzer containing a cation-exchange resin,the amino acids move

through the column at different rates,depending on their overall charge. The solution

leaving the column is collected in fractions,which are collected often enough that a

different amino acid ends up in each fraction (Figure23.4). If ninhydrin is added to

each of the fractions,the concentration of the amino acid in each fraction can be
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 970
Section 23.5Separation of Amino Acids
971Fractions sequentially collectedFigure 23.4
Separation of amino acids byion-exchange chromatography.
MetAspThrValTyrLysSerGluAlaIleLeuPheArg4080120160
GlyProHisNH3200240280320
Effluent (mL)Absorbance33037041045049090
50130
pH 3.3 bufferpH 4.3 bufferpH 5.3 bufferFigure 23.5
A typical chromatogram obtainedfrom the separation of a mixture of
amino acids using an automated
amino acid analyzer.
determined by the amount of absorption at 570nm
Ñbecause the colored compoundformed by the reaction of an amino acid with ninhydrin has a of 570

(Section8.11). In this way,the identity and the relative amount of each amino acid can

be determined (Figure23.5).
lmaxPROBLEM 13Why are buffer solutions of increasingly higher pH used to elute the column that generates
the chromatogram shown in Figure23.5?
PROBLEM 14Explain the order of elution (with a buffer of pH 4) of each of the following pairs of amino

acids on a column packed with Dowex50 (Figure23.3):
a.aspartate before serinec.valine before leucine
b.glycine before alanined.tyrosine before phenylalanine
PROBLEM 15In what order would the following amino acids be eluted with a buffer of pH 4 from a col-
umn containing an anion-exchange resin?
histidine,serine,aspartate,valine
¨BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 971
972CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins23.6Resolution of Racemic Mixtures of Amino Acids
Chemists do not have to rely on nature to produce amino acids; they can synthesize
them in the laboratory,using a variety of methods. One of the oldest methods replaces

an of a carboxylic acid with a bromine in a Hell
ÐVolhard
ÐZelinski reac-tion (Section19.5). The resulting acid then undergoes an re-

action with ammonia to form the amino acid (Section10.4).
PROBLEM 16Why is excess ammonia used in the preceding reaction?
When amino acids are synthesized in nature,only the 
L-enantiomer is formed(Section5.20). However,when amino acids are synthesized in the laboratory,the

product is usually a racemic mixture of Dand Lenantiomers. If only one isomer is de-sired,the enantiomers must be separated. They can be separated by means of an en-

zyme-catalyzed reaction. Because an enzyme is chiral,it will react at a different rate

with each of the enantiomers (Section5.20). For example,pig kidney aminoacylase is

an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of N-acetyl-L-amino acids,but not 
N-acetyl-D-amino acids. Therefore,if the racemic amino acid is converted into a pair of
N-acetylamino acids and the N-acetylated mixture is hydrolyzed with pig kidney
aminoacylase,the products will be the 
L-amino acid and N-acetyl-D-amino acid,which
are easily separated. Because the resolution (separation) of the enantiomers depends

on the difference in the rates of reaction of the enzyme with the two 
N-acetylated com-pounds,this technique is known as a 
kinetic resolution
.PROBLEM 17Pig liver esterase is an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of esters. It hydrolyzes esters
of L-amino acids more rapidly than esters of D-amino acids. How can this enzyme be used
to separate a racemic mixture of amino acids?PROBLEM 18Amino acids can be synthesized by reductive amination of acids (Section21.8).
NH3OOexcess ammoniaH2/Raney NiRCCOH
ORCHCO
a-ketoOBra carboxylicacid1. Br2, PBr32. H3ORCH2COHORCHCOHORCHCONH4BrexcessNH3an amino acidNH3SN2a-bromocarboxylica-hydrogenOD-amino acidL-amino acidCH3COCCH3H2NCHCOROON-acetyl-D-amino acidN-acetyl-L-amino acidCH3CNHCHCO
OCH3CORpig kidneyaminoacylaseH2OOOCH3CNHCHCORRCOHH2NOOOL-amino acidN-acetyl-D-amino acidBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 972
Section 23.7Peptide Bonds and Disulfide Bonds
973Biological organisms can also convert acids into amino acids,but because 
and metal catalysts are not available to the cell,they do so by a different mechanism

(Section25.6.)
a.What amino acid is obtained from the reductive amination of each of the following
metabolic intermediates in the cell?b.What amino acids are obtained from the same metabolic intermediates when they are
synthesized in the laboratory?23.7Peptide Bonds and Disulfide BondsPeptide bonds and disulfide bonds are the only covalent bonds that hold amino acid
residues together in a peptide or a protein.Peptide BondsThe amide bonds that link amino acid residues are called peptide bonds. By conven-
tion,peptides and proteins are written with the free amino group (the 
N-terminalamino acid) on the left and the free carboxyl group (the C-terminal amino acid) onthe right.When the identities of the amino acids in a peptide are known but their sequence is
not known,the amino acids are written separated by commas. When the sequence of

amino acids is known,the amino acids are written separated by hyphens. In the fol-

lowing pentapeptide shown on the right,valine is the N-terminal amino acid and histi-

dine is the C-terminal amino acid. The amino acids are numbered starting with the

N-terminal end. The glutamate residue is referred to as Glu 4 because it is the fourth

amino acid from the N-terminal end. In naming the peptide,adjective names (ending

in ÒylÓ) are used for all the amino acids except the C-terminal amino acid. Thus,this
pentapeptide is named valylcysteylalanylglutamylhistidine.
A peptide bond has about 40% double-bond character because of electron delo-
calization. Steric hindrance causes the trans configuration to be more stable than the
Glu, Cys, His, Val, AlaVal-Cys-Ala-Glu-His
the pentapeptide contains the indicatedamino acids, but their sequence is not knownthe amino acids in the pentapeptidehave the indicated sequenceOH3NCHCRONHCHCRONHCHCO2 H2OROH3NCHCORROH3NCHCOOH3NCHCORa tripeptidepeptide bondsthe C-terminal amino acidthe N-terminal amino acidOOCH3CCOH
OOOHOCCH2CCOH
OOOHOCCH2CH2CCOH
pyruvic acidoxaloacetic acid  -ketoglutaric acid
H2a-ketoBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 973
974CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteinscis configuration,so the of adjacent amino acids are trans to each other
(Section4.11).
Free rotation about the peptide bond is not possible because of its partial double-bondcharacter. The carbon and nitrogen atoms of the peptide bond and the two atoms to

which each is attached are held rigidly in a plane (Figure23.6). This regional planari-

ty affects the way a chain of amino acids can fold,so it has important implications for

the three-dimensional shapes of peptides and proteins (Section23.13).
CHN
CRHRCHOCHN
CRHRCHOtrans configuration  -carbon
  -carbon
a-carbonsOCCHHNNHRRCHCOOCCHHNNHRRCHCOOCCHHNNHRRCHCOCCHHNROFigure 23.6
A segment of a polypeptide chain.The plane defined by each peptide
bond is indicated. Notice that the
Rgroups bonded to the 

are on alternate sides of the
peptide backbone.a-carbonsPROBLEM 19Draw a peptide bond in a cis configuration.
Disulfide BondsWhen thiols are oxidized under mild conditions,they form disulfides. A 
disulfide
is acompound with an bond.
An oxidizing agent commonly used for this reaction is (or ) in a basic solution.
Because thiols can be oxidized to disulfides,disulfides can be reduced to thiols.
Cysteine is an amino acid that contains a thiol group. Two cysteine molecules there-
fore can be oxidized to a disulfide. This disulfide is called cystine.
Two cysteine residues in a protein can be oxidized to a disulfide. This is known as a
disulfide bridge
. Disulfide bridges are the only covalent bonds that can form between
nonadjacent amino acids. They contribute to the overall shape of a protein by holding

the cysteine residues in close proximity,as shown in Figure23.7.
cysteinecystinemild oxidation2 HSCH2CHCOOOCCHCH2SOSCH2CHCOONH3NH3NH3reductiona disulfideRSSR
a thiol2 RSH
HOH2ORSH
BrBr
RSSRBr
RSRSBr
+  BrRSmechanism for oxidation of a thiol to a disulfideI2Br2mild oxidationa disulfideRSSR
a thiol2 RSH
SSBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 974
Section 23.7Peptide Bonds and Disulfide Bonds
975oxidationreductionpolypeptidedisulfide bridges
cross-linking portionsof a polypeptideSHSHSHSHSHHSSSSSSSFigure 23.7
Disulfide bridges cross-linkingportions of a peptide.HAIR: STRAIGHT OR CURLY?
Hair is made up of a protein known as keratin.
Keratin contains an unusually large number of
cysteine residues (about 8% of the amino acids),which give it

many disulfide bridges to maintain its three-dimensional struc-

ture. People can alter the structure of their hair (if they feel that

it is either too straight or too curly) by changing the location of

these disulfide bridges. This is accomplished by first applying

a reducing agent to the hair to reduce all the disulfide bridges
straight hairSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSScurly hairInsulin,a hormone secreted by the pancreas,controls the level of glucose in the
blood by regulating glucose metabolism. Insulin is a polypeptide with two peptide

chains. The short chain (the A-chain) contains 21 amino acids and the long chain (the

B-chain) contains 30 amino acids. The two chains are held together by two disulfide

bridges. These are 
interchain disulfide bridges
(between the A-and B-chains). In-
sulin also has an intrachain disulfide bridge
(within the A-chain).
SSSSGlyIleValGluAsnAsn
GluGlnGln
CysCysCysCys
ThrTyrTyr
LeuLeu
SerSer
IleA-chainPheValAsnGlnValGluPhe
ArgAla
PheLeuHisLeu
LeuCysLeuGly
GlyGlyTyrThrProLys
AlaCys
GluTyr
SerVal
HisB-chainan intrachain disulfide bridgeSSinterchain disulfide bridgesinsulinin the protein strands. Then the hair is given the desired shape
(using curlers to curl it or combing it straight to uncurl it),and

an oxidizing agent is applied that forms new disulfide bridges.

The new disulfide bridges maintain the hair
Õs new shape.
When this treatment is applied to straight hair,it is called a

Òpermanent.ÓWhen it is applied to curly hair,it is called 
Òhairstraightening.ÓBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 975
ornithineH3NCH2CH2CH2CHCOONH3L-ValL-ValL-OrnL-ProL-LeuL-PheD-PheL-LeuL-ProD-Orngramicidin S976CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsPROBLEM 20a.How many different octapeptides can be made from the 20 naturally occurring amino
acids?b.How many different proteins containing 100 amino acids can be made from the 20 nat-
urally occurring amino acids?PROBLEM 21Which bonds in the backbone of a peptide can rotate freely?23.8Some Interesting Peptides
Enkephalins
are pentapeptides that are synthesized by the body to control pain. They
decrease the bodyÕs sensitivity to pain by binding to receptors in certain brain cells.
Part of the three-dimensional structures of enkephalins must be similar to those of

morphine and painkillers such as Demerolbecause they bind to the same receptors

(Sections30.3and 30.6).
Bradykinin,vasopressin,and oxytocin are peptide hormones. They are all nona-
peptides. Bradykinin inhibits the inflammation of tissues. Vasopressin controls

blood pressure by regulating the contraction of smooth muscle. It is also an antidi-

uretic. Oxytocin induces labor in pregnant women and stimulates milk production in

nursing mothers. Vasopressin and oxytocin both have an intrachain disulfide bond,

and their C-terminal amino acids contain amide rather than carboxyl groups. Notice
that the C-terminal amide group is indicated by writing after the name of the

C-terminal amino acid. In spite of their very different physiological effects,vaso-

pressin and oxytocin differ only by two amino acids.
Gramicidin S is an antibiotic produced by a strain of bacteria. It is a cyclic dec-
apeptide. Notice that it contains the amino acids L-ornithine (L-Orn),D-ornithine(D-Orn),and also 
D-phenylalanine. Ornithine is not listed in Table23.1because it oc-
curs rarely in nature. Ornithine resembles lysine,but has one less methylene group in

its side chain.The synthetic sweetener aspartame,or NutraSweet(Section22.21),is the methyl
ester of a dipeptide of L-aspartate and L-phenylalanine. Aspartame is about 200 times
sweeter than sucrose. The ethyl ester of the same dipeptide is not sweet. If a 
D-aminoacid is substituted for either of the L-amino acids of aspartame,the resulting dipeptide
is bitter rather than sweet.COOCH2CH2OH3NCHCNHCHCOCH
3OaspartameNutraSweet¨bradykininArg-Pro-Pro-Gly-Phe-Ser-Pro-Phe-ArgvasopressinCys-Tyr-Phe-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Arg-Gly-NH2SSoxytocinCys-Tyr-Ile-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Leu-Gly-NH2SSÒNH2Óleucine enkephalinTyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leumethionine enkephalinTyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met¨Oxytocin was the first small peptide
to be synthesized. Its synthesis was
achieved in 1953 by 
Vincent du
Vigneaud (1901Ð1978)
,who later
synthesized vasopressin. Du Vi-

gneaud was born in Chicago and was

a professor at George Washington

University Medical School and later

at Cornell University Medical

College. For synthesizing these

nonapeptides,he received the Nobel

Prize in chemistry in 1955.
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 976
Section 23.9Strategy of Peptide Bond Synthesis: N-Protection and C-Activation
9773-D Molecules:Glutathione; 
Oxidized glutathioneGlutathione is a tripeptide of glutamate,cysteine,and glycine. Its function is to de-
stroy harmful oxidizing agents in the body. Oxidizing agents are thought to be respon-

sible for some of the effects of aging and are believed to play a role in cancer

(Section9.8). Glutathione removes oxidizing agents by reducing them.Consequently,

glutathione is oxidized,forming a disulfide bond between two glutathione molecules.

An enzyme subsequently reduces the disulfide bond,allowing glutathione to react

with more oxidizing agents.PROBLEM 22What is unusual about glutathione
Õs structure? (If you canÕt answer this question,draw the
structure you would expect for a tripeptide of glutamate,cysteine,and glycine,and com-

pare your structure with the structure of glutathione.)23.9Strategy of Peptide Bond Synthesis: N-Protection and C-Activation
Because amino acids have two functional groups,a problem arises when one attempts
to make a particular peptide bond. For example,suppose you wanted to make the

dipeptide Gly-Ala. That dipeptide is only one of four possible dipeptides that could be

formed from alanine and glycine.If the amino group of the amino acid that is to be on the N-terminal end (in this
case,Gly) is protected,it will not be available to form a peptide bond. If the carboxyl

group of this same amino acid is activated before the second amino acid is added,the

amino group of the added amino acid (in this case,Ala) will react with the activated
oxidizing agentreducing agentSHCOOCH2OOOH3NCHCH2CH2CNHCHCNHCH
2COSSCOOCH2CH2OOO
H3NCHCH2CH2CNHCHCNHCH
2COCOOOOOH3NCHCH2CH2CNHCHCNHCH
2COglutathioneoxidized glutathioneNHCHCOCH3OOH3NCH2CNHCHCO
CH3CH3OOH3NCHCNHCH
2COOOH3NCH2CNHCH
2COCH3OOH3NCHCGly-AlaAla-AlaGly-GlyAla-Gly
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 977
978CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteinscarboxyl group of glycine in preference to reacting with a nonactivated carboxyl group
of another alanine molecule.The reagent that is most often used to protect the amino group of an amino acid is
di-tert-butyl dicarbonate. Its popularity is due to the ease with which the protecting
group can be removed when the need for protection is over. The protecting group is

known by the acronym 
t-BOC (pronounced tee-boc).Carboxylic acids are generally activated by being converted into acyl chlorides
(Section17.20). Acyl chlorides,however,are so reactive that they can readily react

with the substituents of some of the amino acids during peptide synthesis,creating un-

wanted products. The preferred method for activating the carboxyl group of an N-pro-

tected amino acid is to convert it into an imidate using dicyclohexylcarbodiimide

(DCC). (By now,you have probably noticed that biochemists are even more fond of

acronyms than organic chemists are.) DCC activates a carboxyl group by putting a

good leaving group on the carbonyl carbon.
After the amino acid has its N-terminal group protected and its C-terminal group acti-vated,the second amino acid is added to form the new peptide bond. The bond

of the tetrahedral intermediate is easily broken (the activated group is a good leaving
COCH3OOH2NCH2COH2NCHCOglycineprotectactivatepeptide bond is formedbetween these groupsalanineOH2NCH2COCCH3CH3CCH3CH3OOCOCH3CH3OOCO2NHCH2COCH3CHOCCH
3COCH3CH3CH3CH3OOCglycinedi-tert-butyl dicarbonateN-protected glycineprotontransferan imidateCH3CH3CH3COONCOCNNHCH2COHCH3CH3CH3CNCNHOOOCNHCH
2COCH3CH3CH3CNCNHOOOCNHCH
2CON-protected amino aciddicyclohexylcarbodiimideDCCprotectedactivatedBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 978
Section 23.9Strategy of Peptide Bond Synthesis: N-Protection and C-Activation
979group) because the bonding electrons are delocalized,forming dicyclohexylurea,a
stable diamide. [Recall that the weaker (more stable) the base,the better it is as a leav-

ing group; see Section17.5.]
Amino acids can be added to the growing C-terminal end by repeating these two steps:
activating the carboxyl group of the C-terminal amino acid of the peptide by treating it

with DCC and then adding a new amino acid.
When the desired number of amino acids has been added to the chain,the protect-
ing group on the N-terminal amino acid is removed. 
t-BOC is an ideal protecting
group because it can be removed by washing with trifluoroacetic acid and methylene

chloride,reagents that will not break any other covalent bonds. The protecting group is

removed by an elimination reaction,forming isobutylene and carbon dioxide. Because

these products are gases,they escape,driving the reaction to completion.
amino acidCH3CH3CH3COOON
CNHOCNHCH2CHBHBCH3OH2NCHCOtetrahedral intermediateCH3NHCHCH3CH3COOOHN
CH3CNHOCNHCH2COCCH3CH3CH3CH3CONHCHCOOOONH
CNHOCNHCH2COdicyclohexylureaa diamidenew peptide bond1. DCC2. H2NCHCON-protected dipeptideN-protected tripeptide
ORCH3NHCHCOOONHCH2CCH3CH3CH3COOCCH3CH3CH3COOCCH3NHCHCOORNHCHCOONHCH2CCF3COOHCH2Cl2OONHCH2CCCH3NHCHCOHOONHCHCN-protected tripeptidetripeptideCH2HCH3CH3CCH2CH3CH3COHCF3COOOCORRCH3NHCHCOHOONHCHCCO2ONHCH2COH3NCH2CCH3NHCHCOHOONHCHCRHBHBBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 979
980CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsTheoretically,one should be able to make as long a peptide as desired with this tech-
nique. Reactions do not produce 100% yields,however,and the yields are further de-

creased during the purification process. After each step of the synthesis,the peptide

must be purified to prevent subsequent unwanted reactions with leftover reagents. As-

suming that each amino acid can be added to the growing end of the peptide chain in an

80% yield (a relatively high yield,as you can probably appreciate from your own expe-

rience in the laboratory),the overall yield of a nonapeptide such as bradykinin would be

only 17%. It is clear that large polypeptides could never be synthesized in this way.
Number of amino acids23456789Overall yield80%64%51%41%33%26%21%17%
PROBLEM 23What dipeptides would be formed by heating a mixture of valine and N-protected leucine?
PROBLEM 24Suppose you are trying to synthesize the dipeptide Val-Ser. Compare the product that would
be obtained if the carboxyl group of N-protected valine were activated with thionyl chloride

with the product that would be obtained if the carboxyl group were activated with DCC.
PROBLEM 25Show the steps in the synthesis of the tetrapeptide Leu-Phe-Lys-Val.
PROBLEM 26a.Calculate the overall yield of bradykinin if the yield for the addition of each amino acid
to the chain is 70%.b.What would be the overall yield of a peptide containing 15 amino acid residues if the
yield for the incorporation of each is 80%?23.10Automated Peptide SynthesisIn addition to producing low overall yields,the method of peptide synthesis described
in Section23.9is extremely time-consuming because the product must be purified at

each step of the synthesis. In 1969,Bruce Merrifield described a method that revolu-

tionized the synthesis of peptides because it provided a much faster way to produce

peptides in much higher yields. Furthermore,because it is automated,the synthesis re-

quires fewer hours of direct attention. Using this technique,bradykinin was synthesized

with an 85% yield in 27 hours. Subsequent refinements in the technique now allow a

reasonable yield of a peptide containing 100 amino acids to be synthesized in four days.
In the Merrifield method,the C-terminal amino acid is covalently attached to a
solid support contained in a column. Each N-terminal blocked amino acid is added one

at a time,along with other needed reagents,so the protein is synthesized from the

C-terminal end to the N-terminal end. Notice that this is opposite to the way proteins

are synthesized in nature (from the N-terminal end to the C-terminal end;

Section27.13). Because it uses a solid support and is automated,Merrifield
Õs methodof protein synthesis is called automated solid-phase peptide synthesis.N-protected amino acidMerrifield automated solid-phase synthesis of a tripeptideCH3CH3CH3CClCH
2OCORNHCHCOOresinR. Bruce Merrifield
was born in1921 and received a B.S. and a Ph.D.

from the University of California,Los

Angeles. He is a professor of chem-

istry at Rockefeller University. Merri-

field received the 1984 Nobel Prize in

chemistry for developing automated

solid-phase peptide synthesis.BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 980
Section 23.10Automated Peptide Synthesis
981HFCH2CH3CH3CCO
2RRRRRH2NCHCNHCHCNHCHCOCH
2OOO
HOCH2RH3NCHCNHCHCNHCHCOH
OOO
CF3COOHCH2Cl2CH3CH3CH3COCORRNHCHCNHCHCO
CH2OCH2CH3CH3CCO
2RRH2NCHCNHCHCOCH
2OOOCF3COOHCH2Cl2CH3CH3CH3COCONHCHCOCH
2ON-protected amino acidN-protected and
C-activated amino acidDCCCH3CH3CH3COCONHCHCOH
OCH3CH3CH3COCORRRRNHCHCODCC
OCH2CH3CH3CCO
2H2NCHCOCH
2OTutorial:
Merrifield automated 
solid-phase synthesisN-protected amino acidN-protected and
C-activated amino acidDCCCH3CH3CH3COCORNHCHCOHOCH3CH3CH3COCORNHCHCODCC
OCF3COOHCH2Cl2CH3CH3CH3COCORRNHCHCRNHCHCNHCHCO
CH2OOOBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 981
982CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsThe solid support to which the C-terminal amino acid is attached is a polystyrene
resin similar to the one used in ion-exchange chromatography (Section23.5),except

that the benzene rings have chloromethyl substituents instead of sulfonic acid sub-

stituents. Before the C-terminal amino acid is attached to the resin,its amino group

is protected with t-BOC to prevent the amino group from reacting with the resin.
The C-terminal amino acid is attached to the resin by means of an reaction
Ñitscarboxyl group attacks a benzyl carbon of the resin,displacing a chloride ion

(Section10.4).
After the C-terminal amino acid is attached to the resin,the 
t-BOC protecting groupis removed (Section23.9). The next amino acid,with its amino group protected with

t-BOC and its carboxyl group activated with DCC,is added to the column.
A huge advantage of the Merrifield method of peptide synthesis is that the
growing peptide can be purified by washing the column with an appropriate solvent

after each step of the procedure. The impurities are washed out of the column be-

cause they are not attached to the solid support. Since the peptide is covalently

attached to the resin,none of it is lost in the purification step,leading to high yields

of purified product.
After the required amino acids have been added one by one,the peptide can be re-
moved from the resin by treatment with HF under mild conditions that do not break

the peptide bonds.Merrifield
Õs technique is constantly being improved so that peptides can be
made more rapidly and more efficiently. However,it still cannot begin to compare

with nature:A bacterial cell is able to synthesize a protein thousands of amino

acids long in seconds and can simultaneously synthesize thousands of different

proteins with no mistakes.
Since the early 1980s,it has been possible to synthesize proteins by genetic engi-
neering techniques. Strands of DNA can be introduced into bacterial cells,causing the

cells to produce large amounts of a desired protein (Section27.13). For example,mass

quantities of human insulin are produced from genetically modified 
E. coli. Geneticengineering techniques also have been useful in synthesizing proteins that differ in one

or a few amino acids from the natural protein. Such synthetic proteins have been used,

for example,to learn how a change in a single amino acid affects the properties of a

protein (Section24.9).
PROBLEM 27Show the steps in the synthesis of the peptide in Problem 25,using Merrifield
Õs method.23.11Protein Structure
Protein molecules are described by several levels of structure. The 
primary struc-ture
of a protein is the sequence of amino acids in the chain and the location of allthe disulfide bridges. The 
secondary structure
describes the regular conformation
assumed by segments of the protein
Õs backbone. In other words,the secondary
structure describes how local regions of the backbone fold. The 
tertiary structure
describes the three-dimensional structure of the entire polypeptide. If a protein has
more than one polypeptide chain,it has quaternary structure. The 
quaternary
structure
of a protein is the way the individual protein chains are arranged with re-
spect to each other.
Proteins can be divided roughly into two classes. 
Fibrous proteins
containlong chains of polypeptides that occur in bundles. These proteins are insoluble in

water. All the structural proteins described at the beginning of this chapter,such as

keratin and collagen,are fibrous proteins. 
Globular proteins
are soluble in water
and tend to have roughly spherical shapes. Essentially all enzymes are globular

proteins.SN2BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 982
Section 23.12Determining the Primary Structure of a Protein
983PRIMARY STRUCTURE 
AND EVOLUTIONWhen we examine the primary structures of pro-
teins that carry out the same function in different organisms,

we can relate the number of amino acid differences between

the proteins to the taxonomic differences between the

species. For example,cytochrome 
c,a protein that transfers
electrons in biological oxidations,has about 100 amino acid
residues. Yeast cytochrome 
cdiffers by 48 amino acids from
horse cytochrome 
c,while duck cytochrome 
cdiffers by only
two amino acids from chicken cytochrome 
c. Chickens and
turkeys have cytochrome 
cÕs with identical primary struc-tures. Humans and chimpanzees also have identical cyto-

chrome cÕs,differing by one amino acid from the cytochrome
cof the rhesus monkey.
23.12Determining the Primary Structure of a Protein
The first step in determining the sequence of amino acids in a peptide or a protein is to
reduce any disulfide bridges in the peptide or protein. A commonly used reducing

agent is 2-mercaptoethanol,which is oxidized to a disulfide. Reaction of the protein

thiol groups with iodoacetic acid prevents the disulfide bridges from reforming as a re-

sult of oxidation by PROBLEM 28Write the mechanism for the reaction of a cysteine residue with iodoacetic acid.
The next step is to determine the number and kinds of amino acids in the peptide or
protein. To do this,a sample of the peptide or protein is dissolved in 6NHCl and heat-

ed at for 24hours. This treatment hydrolyzes all the amide bonds in the pro-

tein,including the amide bonds of asparagine and glutamine.
6 N HCI100 C24 hproteinamino acids
100 ¡CICH2COHcleaving disulfide bridgesOCH2CH2SSCONHCHCONHCH2 HSCH2CH2OHCH2CH2SHSHSCH2CH2OHSCH2CH2OHCONHCHCONHCHCH2CH2SCH2COHSCH2COHCOOONHCHCO2 HINHCHiodoacetic acid2-mercaptoethanolO2.Insulin was the first protein for which
the primary sequence was deter-
mined. This was done in 1953 by

Frederick Sanger
,who received the
1958 Nobel Prize in chemistry for his

work. Sanger was born in England in

1918 and received a Ph.D. from

Cambridge University,where he has

worked for his entire career. He also

received a share of the 1980 Nobel

Prize in chemistry (Section27.15) for

being the first to sequence a DNA

molecule (with 5375 nucleotide
pairs).
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 983
984CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsThe mixture of amino acids is then passed through an amino acid analyzer to deter-mine the number and kind of each amino acid in the peptide or protein (Section23.5).
Because all the asparagine and glutamine residues have been hydrolyzed to aspar-
tate and glutamate residues,the number of aspartate or glutamate residues in the

amino acid mixture tells us the number of aspartate plus asparagineÑor glutamateplus glutamineÑresidues in the original protein. A separate technique must be used to
distinguish between aspartate and asparagine or between glutamate and glutamine in
the original protein.The strongly acidic conditions used for hydrolysis destroy all the tryptophan
residues because the indole ring is unstable in acid (Section21.9). The tryptophan

content of the protein can be determined by hydroxide-ion-promoted hydrolysis of the

protein. This is not a general method for peptide bond hydrolysis because the strongly

basic conditions destroy several other amino acid residues.
There are several ways to identify the N-terminal amino acid of a peptide or pro-
tein. One of the most widely used methods is to treat the protein with phenyl isothio-

cyanate (PITC),more commonly known as 
EdmanÕs reagent
. This reagent reacts
with the N-terminal amino group,and the resulting thiazolinone derivative is cleaved

from the protein under mildly acidic conditions. The thiazolinone derivative is extract-

ed into an organic solvent and in the presence of acid,rearranges to a more stable

phenylthiohydantoin (PTH).
Because each amino acid has a different substituent (R),each amino acid forms a
different PTH. The particular PTH can be identified by chromatography using known

standards. Several successive Edman degradations can be carried out on a protein.

The entire primary sequence cannot be determined in this way,however,because side
OHCHNHNRSHClthiazolinonederivativeOH3NCHCRONHCHCROHCHNSRNPTHÐamino acidpeptide without the originalN-terminal amino acidphenyl isothiocyanatePITCEdman's reagentNH2NCHCNHCHCNHCHC
COOO
RRRSNHNHCHCNHCHCNHCHC
COOONHCHCORRRSNHHRNCSCHHF
CORNHCHCORHFBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 984
Section 23.12Determining the Primary Structure of a Protein
985products accumulate that interfere with the results. An automated instrument known
as a sequenatorallows about 50 successive Edman degradations to be carried out on
a protein.The C-terminal amino acid of the peptide or protein can be identified by treating the
protein with carboxypeptidase A. Carboxypeptidase A cleaves off the C-terminal

amino acid as long as it is notarginine or lysine (Section24.9). On the other hand,car-
boxypeptidase B cleaves off the C-terminal amino acid 
onlyif it is arginine or lysine.
Carboxypeptidases are exopeptidases. An 
exopeptidaseis an enzyme that catalyzes
the hydrolysis of a peptide bond at the end of a peptide chain.Once the N-terminal and C-terminal amino acids have been identified,a sample of
the protein is hydrolyzed with dilute acid. This treatment,called 
partial hydrolysis
,hydrolyzes only some of the peptide bonds. The resulting fragments are separated,and

the amino acid composition of each is determined. The N-terminal and C-terminal

amino acids of each fragment can also be identified. The sequence of the original

protein can then be determined by lining up the peptides and looking for points
ofoverlap.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
A nonapeptide undergoes partial hydrolysis to give peptides whose amino acid composi-
tions are shown. Reaction of the intact nonapeptide with Edman
Õs reagent releasesPTH-Leu. What is the sequence of the nonapeptide?
a.Pro,Serc.Met,Ala,Leue.Glu,Ser,Val,Prog.Met,Leu
b.Gly,Glud.Gly,Alaf.Glu,Pro,Glyh.His,Val
LetÕs start with the N-terminal amino acid. We know that it is Leu. Now we need to look
for a fragment that contains Leu. Fragment (g) tells us that Met is next to Leu and fragment

(c) tells us that Ala is next to Met. Now we look for a fragment that contains Ala. Fragment

(d) contains Ala and tells us that Gly is next to Ala. From fragment (b),we know that Glu

comes next. Glu is in both fragments (e) and (f). Fragment (e) has two amino acids we have

yet to place in the growing peptide,but fragment (f) has only one,so from fragment (f),we

know that Pro is the next amino acid. Now we can use fragment (e). Fragment (e) tells us

that the next amino acid is Val,and fragment (h) tells us that His is the last (C-terminal)

amino acid. Thus,the amino acid sequence of the nonapeptide is
Leu-Met-Ala-Gly-Glu-Pro-Ser-Val-His
Now continue on to Problem 29.
PROBLEM 29A decapeptide undergoes partial hydrolysis to give peptides whose amino acid composi-
tions are shown. Reaction of the intact decapeptide with Edman
Õs reagent releasesPTH-Gly. What is the sequence of the decapeptide?
a.Ala,Trpc.Pro,Vale.Trp,Ala,Argg.Glu,Ala,Leu
b.Val,Pro,Aspd.Ala,Gluf.Arg,Glyh.Met,Pro,Leu,Glu
The peptide or protein can also be partially hydrolyzed using endopeptidases. An
endopeptidaseis an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of a peptide bond that is not
at the end of a peptide chain.Trypsin,chymotrypsin,and elastase are endopeptidases
RRRNHCHCOOOONHCHCNHCHCsite where carboxypeptidase cleavesBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 985
986CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsTable 23.3Specificity of Peptide or Protein Cleavage
ReagentSpecificity
Chemical reagentsEdmanÕs reagentremoves the N-terminal amino acid
Cyanogen bromidehydrolyzes on the C-side of Met
Exopeptidases*Carboxypeptidase Aremoves the C-terminal amino acid (not Arg or Lys)

Carboxypeptidase Bremoves the C-terminal amino acid (only Arg or Lys)
Endopeptidases*Trypsinhydrolyzes on the C-side of Arg and Lys

Chymotrypsinhydrolyzes on the C-side of amino acids that contain
aromatic six-membered rings (Phe,Tyr,Trp)
Elastasehydrolyzes on the C-side of small amino acids
(Gly and Ala)
*Cleavage will not occur if Pro is on either side of the bond to be hydrolyzed.
that catalyze the hydrolysis of only the specific peptide bonds listed in Table23.3.
Trypsin,for example,catalyzes the hydrolysis of the peptide bond on the C-side of

only arginine or lysine residues.
Thus,trypsin will catalyze the hydrolysis of three peptide bonds in the following
peptide,creating a hexapeptide,a dipeptide,and two tripeptides.
Chymotrypsin catalyzes the hydrolysis of the peptide bond on the C-side of aminoacids that contain aromatic six-membered rings (Phe,Tyr,Trp).
Elastase catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds on the C-side of small amino acids
(Gly,Ala). Chymotrypsin and elastase are much less specific than trypsin. (An expla-

nation for the specificity of these enzymes is given in Section24.9.)
cleavage by elastaseAla-Lys-Phe-Gly-Asp-Trp-Ser-Arg-Met-Val-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Hiscleavage by chymotrypsinAla-Lys-Phe-Gly-Asp-Trp-Ser-Arg-Met-Val-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Hiscleavage by trypsinAla-Lys-Phe-Gly-Asp-Trp-Ser-Arg-Met-Val-Arg-Tyr-Leu-HisRCH2CH2CH2CH2NH3CH2CH2NHCNH2NH2RNHCHCOOORNHCHCOCH2NHCHCORNHCHCONHCHCNHCHCC-side of arginineC-side of lysine3-D Molecules:Carboxypeptidase A; 
ChymotrypsinBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 986
Section 23.12Determining the Primary Structure of a Protein
987None of the exopeptidases or endopeptidases that we have mentioned will catalyze the
hydrolysis of an amide bond if proline is at the hydrolysis site. These enzymes recog-

nize the appropriate hydrolysis site by its shape and charge,and proline
Õs structurecauses the hydrolysis site to have an unrecognizable three-dimensional shape.
Cyanogen bromide causes the hydrolysis of the amide bond on the
C-side of a methionine residue. Cyanogen bromide is more specific than the en-

dopeptidases about what peptide bonds it cleaves,so it provides more reliable infor-

mation about the primary structure (the sequence of amino acids). Because cyanogen

bromide is not a protein and therefore does not recognize the substrate by its shape,

cyanogen bromide will still cleave the peptide bond if proline is at the cleavage site.
The first step in the mechanism for cleavage of a peptide bond by cyanogen bro-
mide is attack by the highly nucleophilic sulfur of methionine on cyanogen bromide.

Formation of a five-membered ring with departure of the weakly basic leaving group

is followed by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis,which cleaves the protein (Section18.6).

Further hydrolysis can cause the lactone (a cyclic ester) to open to a carboxyl group

and an alcohol group (Section17.11).
H2OH2ONRRNHCHCNHCHH
3NCHCOONHCHCNHCHRCH2CH2OHCH2CH2OOOOCOHCO
RRNHCHCNHCHOOCH2CH2CNHCHC
CH3SCHClHClRRRNHCHCNHCHOOO
NHCHCNHCHCNHCHRCH2CH2SCH3CH2CH2SCH3OOCCNCNBrONHCHCCmechanism for the cleavage of a peptide bond by cyanogen bromideBrAla-Lys-Phe-Gly-Lys-Trp-Ser-Arg-Met-Val-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Hiscleavage by cyanogen bromide(BrCN)Ala-Lys-ProLeu-Phe-ProPro-Phe-Val
chymotrypsin will cleavechymotrypsin will not cleavetrypsin will not cleaveBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 987
988CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsThe last step in determining the primary structure of a protein is to figure out the lo-
cation of any disulfide bonds. This is done by hydrolyzing a sample of the protein that

has intact disulfide bonds. From a determination of the amino acids in the cysteine-

containing fragments,the locations of the disulfide bonds in the protein can be estab-

lished (Problem 47).PROBLEM 30Why won
Õt cyanogen bromide cleave at cysteine residues?
PROBLEM 31In determining the primary structure of insulin,what would lead you to conclude that it
had more than one polypeptide chain?PROBLEM 32SOLVED
Determine the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide from the following results:
Acid hydrolysis gives Ala,Arg,His,2Lys,Leu,2Met,Pro,2Ser,Thr,Val.
Carboxypeptidase A releases Val.

EdmanÕs reagent releases PTH-Leu.Cleavage with cyanogen bromide gives three peptides with the following amino acid
compositions:1.His,Lys,Met,Pro,Ser3.Ala,Arg,Leu,Lys,Met,Ser

2.Thr,Val
Trypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis gives three peptides and a single amino acid:
1.Arg,Leu,Ser3.Lys

2.Met,Pro,Ser,Thr,Val4.Ala,His,Lys,Met
SOLUTIONAcid hydrolysis shows that the polypeptide has 13 amino acids. The N-ter-
minal amino acid is Leu (EdmanÕs reagent),and the C-terminal amino acid is Val (car-
boxypeptidase A).Because cyanogen bromide cleaves on the C-side of Met,any peptide containing Met
must have Met as its C-terminal amino acid. The peptide that does not contain Met must be

the C-terminal peptide. We know that peptide 3 is the N-terminal peptide because it con-

tains Leu. Since it is a hexapeptide,we know that the 6th amino acid in the 13-amino acid

peptide is Met. We also know that the eleventh amino acid is Met because cyanogen bro-

mide cleavage gave the dipeptide Thr,Val.
Because trypsin cleaves on the C-side of Arg and Lys,any peptide containing Arg or Lys
must have that amino acid as its C-terminal amino acid. Therefore,Arg is the C-terminal

amino acid of peptide 1,so we now know that the first three amino acids are Leu-Ser-Arg.

We also know that the next two are Lys-Ala because if they were Ala-Lys,trypsin cleav-

age would give an Ala,Lys dipeptide. The trypsin data also identify the positions of His

and Lys.
Finally,because trypsin successfully cleaves on the C-side of Lys,Pro cannot be adja-
cent to Lys. Thus,the amino acid sequence of the given polypeptide is
LeuSerArgLysAlaMetHisLysSerProMetThrVal
LeuSerArgLysAlaMetHisLys
Pro, SerMetThrVal
LeuMet
Ala, Arg, Lys, SerHis, Lys, Pro, Ser
MetThrVal
LeuVal
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:36 PM  Page 988
Section 23.13Secondary Structure of Proteins
989PROBLEM 33Determine the primary structure of an octapeptide from the following data:
Acid hydrolysis gives 2Arg,Leu,Lys,Met,Phe,Ser,Tyr.
Carboxypeptidase A releases Ser.

EdmanÕs reagent releases Leu.Cyanogen bromide forms two peptides with the following amino acid compositions:
1.Arg,Phe,Ser2.Arg,Leu,Lys,Met,Tyr
Trypsin forms the following two peptides and two amino acids:
1.Arg3.Arg,Met,Phe

2.Ser4.Leu,Lys,Tyr
23.13Secondary Structure of Proteins
Secondary structure
describes the conformation of segments of the backbone chain of
a peptide or protein. To minimize energy,a polypeptide chain tends to fold in a repeat-

ing geometric structure such as an or a sheet. Three factors deter-

mine the choice of secondary structure:¥the regional planarity about each peptide bond (as a result of the partial double-
bond character of the amide bond),which limits the possible conformations of

the peptide chain (Section23.7)
¥maximization of the number of peptide groups that engage in hydrogen bonding(i.e.,hydrogen bonding between the carbonyl oxygen of one amino acid residue

and the amide hydrogen of another)¥adequate separation between nearby R groups to avoid steric hindrance and
repulsion of like charges
-HelixOne type of secondary structure is the In an the backbone of the

polypeptide coils around the long axis of the protein molecule (Figure23.8). The helix

is stabilized by hydrogen bonds:Each hydrogen attached to an amide nitrogen is
a-helix,A-helix.Ab-pleateda-helixCHNNHRRRRHNOOOhydrogen bondingbetween peptide
groupsa.b.Figure 23.8
(a)A segment of a protein in an
(b)Looking up the
longitudinal axis of an a-helix.a-helix.BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 989
990CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins3-D Molecule:An a-helixhydrogen bonded to a carbonyl oxygen of an amino acid four residues away. The sub-
stituents on the of the amino acids protrude outward from the helix,thereby

minimizing steric hindrance. Because the amino acids have the 
L-configuration,the
is a right-handed helix; that is,it rotates in a clockwise direction as it spirals
down. Each turn of the helix contains 3.6 amino acid residues,and the repeat distance

of the helix is 5.4†.Notall amino acids are able to fit into an A proline residue,for exam-
ple,forces a bend in a helix because the bond between the proline nitrogen and the
cannot rotate to enable it to fit readily into a helix. Similarly,two adja-
cent amino acids that have more than one substituent on a (valine,

isoleucine,or threonine) cannot fit into a helix because of steric crowding between

the R groups. Finally,two adjacent amino acids with like-charged substituents

cannot fit into a helix because of electrostatic repulsion between the R groups. The

percentage of amino acid residues coiled into an varies from protein to

protein,but,on average,about 25% of the residues in globular proteins are in
-Pleated SheetThe second type of secondary structure is the In a sheet,

the polypeptide backbone is extended in a zigzag structure resembling a series of

pleats. A sheet is almost fully extended
Ñthe average two-residue repeat
distance is 7.0
†. The hydrogen bonding in a sheet occurs between neigh-
boring peptide chains. The adjacent hydrogen-bonded peptide chains can run in the

same direction or in opposite directions. In a parallel sheet,the adjacent
chains run in the same direction. In an 
antiparallel sheet,the adjacent
chains run in opposite directions (Figure23.9).
B-pleatedB-pleatedb-pleatedb-pleatedb-pleatedB-pleated sheet.Ba-helices.a-helixb-carbona-carbona-helix.a-helixa-carbons3-D Molecule:Antiparallel sheetb-pleatedCHRNHCCHRNNHCRHRHCRHCCOHCCHRNHCCHRNNHCCOHCOOHROOParallelN-terminalN-terminalC-terminalC-terminalCHRNHCCHRNNHCRHRHCRCHRCHCOHCRHCNHRCCHNNHCCOOOHOOAntiparallelN-terminalC-terminalN-terminalC-terminalFigure 23.9
Segment of a sheet
drawn to illustrate its pleated
character.
b-pleatedBecausethe substituents (R) on the of the amino acids on adjacent chains
are close to each other,the chains can nestle closely together to maximize hydrogen-

bonding interactions only if the substituents are small. Silk,for example,a protein

with a large number of relatively small amino acids (glycine and alanine),has large

segments of sheets. The number of side-by-side strands in a sheet

ranges from 2 to 15 in a globular protein. The average strand in a sheet sec-

tion of a globular protein contains six amino acid residues.
Wool and the fibrous protein of muscle are examples of proteins with secondary
structures that are almost all Consequently,these proteins can be stretched.

In contrast,the secondary structures of silk and spider webs are predominantly
sheets. Because the sheet is a fully extended structure,these pro-
teins cannot be stretched.b-pleatedb-pleateda-helices.b-pleatedb-pleatedb-pleateda-carbonsBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 990
Section 23.14Tertiary Structure of Proteins
991Coil ConformationGenerally,less than half of a globular protein is in an or sheet
(Figure23.10). Most of the rest of the protein is still highly ordered but is difficult to

describe. These polypeptide fragments are said to be in a 
coil conformation
or a loopconformation
.b-pleateda-helixFigure 23.10
The backbone structure ofcarboxypeptidase A:segments are purple;sheets are indicatedby flat green arrows pointing in
the direction.NCb-pleateda-helical23.14Tertiary Structure of Proteins
The tertiary structure
of a protein is the three-dimensional arrangement of all theatoms in the protein. Proteins fold spontaneously in solution in order to maximize their

stability. Every time there is a stabilizing interaction between two atoms,free energy is

released. The more free energy released (the more negative the ),the more stable

the protein. So a protein tends to fold in a way that maximizes the number of stabiliz-

ing interactions (Figure23.11).
¡AN ATTEMPT 
TO IMPROVE ON NATURE
Chemists are currently studying which are polymers of acids. These peptides have

backbones one carbon longer than the peptides nature synthe-

sizes using acids. Therefore,each acid

residue has two carbons to which side chains can be attached.
Like fold into relatively sta-
ble helical and pleated sheet conformations,causing scientists

to wonder whether biological activity might be possible with

such peptides. Recently,a with biological activity

has been synthesizedÑone that mimics the activity of the hor-
b-peptideb-polypeptidesa-polypeptides,b-aminoa-aminob-aminob-peptides,B-PEPTIDES:mone somatostatin. There is hope that will pro-
vide a source of new drugs and catalysts. Surprisingly,the pep-

tide bonds in are resistant to the enzymes that

catalyze the hydrolysis of peptide bonds in 

This resistance to hydrolysis means that a drug

will have a longer duration of action in the bloodstream.
H3NROOCHC
   -amino acidH3NRROOCHCHC
  -amino acid
b-polypeptidea-polypeptides.b-polypeptidesb-polypeptidesPROBLEM 34How long is an that contains 74 amino acids? Compare the length of this 
with the length of a fully extended peptide chain containing the same number of amino

acids. (The distance between consecutive amino acids in a fully extended chain is 3.5
†.)a-helixa-helixBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 991
992CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and ProteinsThe stabilizing interactions include covalent bonds,hydrogen bonds,electrostatic
attractions (attractions between opposite charges),and hydrophobic (van der

Waals) interactions. Stabilizing interactions can occur between peptide groups

(atoms in the backbone of the protein),between side-chain groups 

and between peptide and side-chain groups. Because the side-chain groups help de-

termine how a protein folds,the tertiary structure of a protein is determined by its

primary structure.Disulfide bonds are the only covalent bonds that can form when a protein folds. The
other bonding interactions that occur in folding are much weaker,but because there

are so many of them (Figure23.12),they are the important interactions in determining

how a protein folds.
Most proteins exist in aqueous environments. Therefore,they tend to fold in a
way that exposes the maximum number of polar groups to the aqueous environ-

ment and that buries the nonpolar groups in the interior of the protein,away

fromwater.
The interactions between nonpolar groups are known as 
hydrophobic interac-
tions. These interactions increase the stability of a protein by increasing the entropy of
water molecules. Water molecules that surround nonpolar groups are highly

structured. When two nonpolar groups come together,the surface area in contact with

water decreases,decreasing the amount of structured water. Decreasing structure in-

creases entropy,which in turn decreases the free energy,which increases the stability

of the protein. (Recall that )
¡¡¡.(a-substituents),Helical Structure
Pleated SheetStructure
COOH3NHN C    OCH2OHO    CCHCH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH2C   NHHOCH2H(CH2)4NH3OCCH2OCH   S   S   CH2O Figure 23.11
Stabilizing interactions responsible for the tertiary structure of a protein.Max Perutz
was born in Austria in
1914. In 1936,because of the rise of

Nazism,he moved to England. He

received a Ph.D. from,and became a

professor at,Cambridge University.

He worked on the three-dimensional

structure of hemoglobin and assigned

the work on myoglobin (a smaller pro-

tein) to John Kendrew (1917
Ð1997).Kendrew was born in England 

and was educated at Cambridge

University.
Max Ferdinand Perutz
and John
Cowdery Kendrew
were the first to
determine the tertiary structure of a

protein. Using X-ray diffraction,they

determined the tertiary structure of

myoglobin (1957) and hemoglobin

(1959). For this work,they shared the

1962 Nobel Prize in chemistry.
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 992
Figure 23.13
Computer graphic representation ofthe quaternary structure of
hemoglobin. The orange and pink
subunits are identical, as are the
green and purple subunits. The
cylindrical tubes represent the
polypeptide chains, while the beads
represent the iron-containing
porphyrin rings (Section21.11).
Section 23.15Quaternary Structure of Proteins
993Figure 23.12
The three-dimensional structure ofcarboxypeptidase A.PROBLEM 35How would a protein that resides in the interior of a membrane fold,compared with the
water-soluble protein just discussed?
23.15Quaternary Structure of Proteins
Proteins that have more than one peptide chain are called 
oligomers. The individual
chains are called subunits
. A protein with a single subunit is called a 
monomer,one
with two subunits is called a 
dimer; one with three subunits is called a 
trimer,and
one with four subunits is called a 
tetramer
. Hemoglobin is an example of a tetramer.
It has two different kinds of subunits and two of each kind. The quaternary structure

of hemoglobin is shown in Figure23.13.
The subunits are held together by the same kinds of interactions that hold the indi-
vidual protein chains in a particular three-dimensional conformation:hydrophobic in-

teractions,hydrogen bonding,and electrostatic attractions. The quaternary structure of

a protein describes the way the subunits are arranged in space. Some of the possible

arrangements of the six subunits of a hexamer are shown here:
PROBLEM 36a.Which of the following water-soluble proteins would have the greatest percentage of
polar amino acidsÑa spherical protein,a cigar-shaped protein,or a subunit of a
hexamer?
b.Which of these would have the smallest percentage of polar amino acids?
possible quaternary structures for a hexamerBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 993
994CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins23.16Protein Denaturation
Destroying the highly organized tertiary structure of a protein is called 
denaturation.Anything that breaks the bonds responsible for maintaining the three-dimensional shape

of the protein will cause the protein to denature (unfold). Because these bonds are weak,

proteins are easily denatured. The totally random conformation of a denatured protein is

called a random coil
.The following are some of the ways that proteins can be denatured:
¥Changing the pH denatures proteins because it changes the charges on many of
the side chains. This disrupts electrostatic attractions and hydrogen bonds.
¥Certain reagents such as urea and guanidine hydrochloride denature proteins by
forming hydrogen bonds to the protein groups that are stronger than the hydro-

gen bonds formed between the groups.¥Detergents such as sodium dodecyl sulfate denature proteins by associating with
the nonpolar groups of the protein,thus interfering with the normal hydrophobic

interactions.¥Organic solvents denature proteins by disrupting hydrophobic interactions.
¥Proteins can also be denatured by heat or by agitation. Both increase molecular
motion,which can disrupt the attractive forces. A well-known example is the

change that occurs to the white of an egg when it is heated or whipped.
SummaryPeptides
and proteins
are polymers of amino acidslinked
together by peptide(amide) bonds. A dipeptidecontainstwo amino acid residues,a 
tripeptidecontains three,an
oligopeptidecontains three to 10,and a 
polypeptidecon-tains many amino acid residues. Proteins have 40 to 4000

amino acid residues. The 
amino acidsdiffer only in the
substituent attached to the Most amino acids

found in nature have the 
Lconfiguration.
The carboxyl groups of the amino acids have values
of and the protonated amino groups have values of
At physiological pH,an amino acid exists as a
zwitterion. A few amino acids have side chains with ioniz-
able hydrogens. The 
isoelectric point(pI) of an amino acidis the pH at which the amino acid has no net charge. A mix-

ture of amino acids can be separated based on their pIÕs byelectrophoresis
or based on their polarities by paperchromatography
or thin-layer chromatography
. Prepar-ative separation can be achieved using 
ion-exchangechromatography
employing a 
cation-exchange resin
. Anamino acid analyzeris an instrument that automates
ion-exchange chromatography. A racemic mixture of amino

acids can be separated by a kinetic resolution
.The amide bonds that link amino acid residues are calledpeptide bonds. A peptide bond has about 40% double-
bond character. Two cysteine residues can be oxidized to a

disulfide bridge
. Disulfide bridges are the only covalent
bonds that can form between nonadjacent amino acids. By

convention,peptides and proteins are written with the free

amino group (the N-terminal amino acid) on the left andthe free carboxyl group (the C-terminal amino acid) onthe right.9.pa2paa-carbon.To synthesize a peptide bond,the amino group of the
first amino acid must be protected (by 
t-BOC) and its car-boxyl group activated (with DCC). The second amino acid

is added to form a dipeptide. Amino acids can be added to

the growing C-terminal end by repeating these two steps:

activating the carboxyl group of the C-terminal amino acid

with DCC and adding a new amino acid. 
Automated solid-
phase peptide synthesisallows peptides to be made more
rapidly and in higher yields.The primary structure
of a protein is the sequence of itsamino acids and the location of all its disulfide bridges. The

N-terminal amino acid of a peptide or protein can be deter-
mined with EdmanÕs reagent
. The C-terminal amino acid
can be identified with carboxypeptidase. 
Partial hydrolysis
hydrolyzes only some of the peptide bonds. An 
exopeptid-asecatalyzes the hydrolysis of a peptide bond at the end of apeptide chain. An 
endopeptidasecatalyzes the hydrolysis ofa peptide bond that is not at the end of a peptide chain.The secondary structure
of a protein describes how local
segments of the protein
Õs backbone folds. A protein folds
soas to maximize the number of stabilizing interactions:

covalent bonds,hydrogen bonds,electrostatic attractions

(attraction between opposite charges),and 
hydrophobic in-
teractions(interactions between nonpolar groups). An
a and a 
coil conformation
aretypes of secondary structure. The 
tertiary structure
of aprotein is the three-dimensional arrangement of all the atoms
in the protein. Proteins with more than one peptide chain are

called oligomers. The individual chains are called 
subunits
.The quaternary structure
of a protein describes the way the
subunits
are arranged with respect to each other in space.B-pleated sheet,A-helix,BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 994
Problems995Key Terms
amino acid (p.959)
D-amino acid (p.964)
L-amino acid (p.964)
amino acid analyzer (p.970)

amino acid residue (p.959)

anion-exchange resin (p.970)

antiparallel sheet (p.990)

automated solid-phase peptide synthesis(p.980)
cation-exchange resin (p.970)

coil conformation (p.991)

C-terminal amino acid (p.973)

denaturation (p.994)

dipeptide (p.959)

disulfide (p.979)

disulfide bridge (p.974)

EdmanÕs reagent (p.984)
electrophoresis (p.968)
b-pleatedendopeptidase (p.985)
enzyme (p.960)

essential amino acid (p.963)

exopeptidase (p.985)

fibrous protein (p.982)

globular protein (p.982)
(p.989)
hydrophobic interactions (p.992)

interchain disulfide bridge (p.975)

intrachain disulfide bridge (p.975)

ion-exchange chromatography(p.970)

isoelectric point (p.966)

kinetic resolution (p.972)

loop conformation (p.991)

N-terminal amino acid (p.973)

oligomer (p.993)

oligopeptide (p.959)

paper chromatography (p.969)
a-helixparallel sheet (p.990)
partial hydrolysis (p.985)

peptide (p.959)

peptide bond (p.973)
sheet (p.990)
polypeptide (p.959)

primary structure (p.982)

protein (p.959)

quaternary structure (p.982)

random coil (p.994)

secondary structure (p.982)

structural protein (p.959)

subunit (p.993)

tertiary structure (p.982)

thin-layer chromatography (p.969)

tripeptide (p.959)

zwitterion (p.965)
b-pleatedb-pleatedProblems
37.Unlike most amines and carboxylic acids,amino acids are insoluble in diethyl ether. Explain.
38.Indicate the peptides that would result from cleavage by the indicated reagent:
a.His-Lys-Leu-Val-Glu-Pro-Arg-Ala-Gly-Ala by trypsin

b.Leu-Gly-Ser-Met-Phe-Pro-Tyr-Gly-Val by chymotrypsin

c.Val-Arg-Gly-Met-Arg-Ala-Ser by carboxypeptidase A

d.Ser-Phe-Lys-Met-Pro-Ser-Ala-Asp by cyanogen bromide

e.Arg-Ser-Pro-Lys-Lys-Ser-Glu-Gly by trypsin
39.Aspartame has a pI of 5.9. Draw its most prevalent form at physiological pH.
40.Draw the form of aspartic acid that predominates at
a.b.c.d.
41.Dr. Kim S. Tree was preparing a manuscript for publication in which she reported that the pI of the tripeptide Lys-Lys-Lys w
as10.6. One of her students pointed out that there must be an error in her calculations because the of the group of lysine

is 10.8 and the pI of the tripeptide has to be greater than any of its individual values. Was the student correct?
42.A mixture of amino acids that do not separate sufficiently when a single technique is used can often be separated by
two-dimensional chromatography. In this technique,the mixture of amino acids is applied to a piece of filter paper and separate
dby chromatographic techniques. The paper is then rotated 90
¡,and the amino acids are further separated by electrophoresis,
producing a type of chromatogram called a fingerprint
. Identify the spots in the fingerprint obtained from a mixture of Ser,Glu,
Leu,His,Met,and Thr.
Electrophoresisat pH  5Chromatographypae-aminopapH11.0pH6.0pH2.6pH1.0Author:Insert term that is 
boldfacein text? 
Or make lightface in text?
enkephalins (p.976)
BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 995
996CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins43.Explain the difference in the values of the carboxyl groups of alanine,serine,and cysteine.
44.Which would be a more effective buffer at physiological pH,a solution of 0.1M glycylglycylglycylglycine or a solution of 0.2
Mglycine?45.Identify the location and type of charge on the hexapeptide Lys-Ser-Asp-Cys-His-Tyr at
a.b.c.
46.The following polypeptide was treated with 2-mercaptoethanol and then with iodoacetic acid. After reacting with maleic
anhydride,the peptide was hydrolyzed by trypsin. (Treatment with maleic anhydride causes trypsin to cleave a peptide only at

arginine residues.)
Gly-Ser-Asp-Ala-Leu-Pro-Gly-Ile-Thr-Ser-Arg-Asp-Val-Ser-Lys-Val-Glu-Tyr-Phe-Glu-Ala-Gly-Arg-Ser-Glu-Phe-Lys-Glu-Pro-
Arg-Leu-Tyr-Met-Lys-Val-Glu-Gly-Arg-Pro-Val-Ser-Ala-Gly-Leu-Trp

a.Why,after a peptide is treated with maleic anhydride,does trypsin no longer cleave it at lysine residues?

b.How many fragments are obtained from the peptide?

c.In what order would the fragments be eluted from an anion-exchange column using a buffer of 
47.Treatment of a polypeptide with 2-mercaptoethanol yields two polypeptides with the following primary sequences:
Val-Met-Tyr-Ala-Cys-Ser-Phe-Ala-Glu-Ser
Ser-Cys-Phe-Lys-Cys-Trp-Lys-Tyr-Cys-Phe-Arg-Cys-Ser
Treatment of the original intact polypeptide with chymotrypsin yields the following peptides:
a.Ala,Glu,Serc.Tyr,Val,Mete.Ser,Phe,2 Cys,Lys,Ala,Trp

b.2 Phe,2 Cys,Serd.Arg,Ser,Cysf.Tyr,Lys

Determine the positions of the disulfide bridges in the original polypeptide.
48.Show how aspartame can be synthesized using DCC.

49.Reaction of a polypeptide with carboxypeptidase A releases Met. The polypeptide undergoes partial hydrolysis to give the
following peptides. What is the sequence of the polypeptide?

a.Ser,Lys,Trpe.Met,Ala,Glyi.Lys,Ser

b.Gly,His,Alaf.Ser,Lys,Valj.Glu,His,Val

c.Glu,Val,Serg.Glu,Hisk.Trp,Leu,Glu

d.Leu,Glu,Serh.Leu,Lys,Trpl.Ala,Met
50.Glycine has values of 2.3 and 9.6. Would you expect the values of glycylglycine to be higher or lower than these values?

51.A mixture of 15 amino acids gave the fingerprint shown in the below (see also Problem 42). Identify the spots. (
Hint1:
Pro reactswith ninhydrin to form a yellow color; Phe and Tyr form a yellow-green color. 
Hint2:
Count the number of spots before you start.)52.Dithiothreitol reacts with disulfide bridges in the same way that 2-mercaptoethanol does. With dithiothreitol,however,the
equilibrium lies much more to the right. Explain.HOHO
SHRSSRSHSSHOHO
2 RSHdithiothreitolElectrophoresis at pH  5ChromatographyOriginStarting mixture:AlaArg
Asp
Glu
GlyIleLeu
Met
Phe
ProSerThr
Trp
Tyr
ValpapapH5?pH9pH5pH7paBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 996
Problems99753.acids can be prepared by treating an aldehyde with ammonia and hydrogen cyanide,followed by acid-catalyzed
hydrolysis.
a.Give the structures of the two intermediates formed in this reaction.

b.What amino acid is formed when the aldehyde that is used is 3-methylbutanal?

c.What aldehyde would be needed to prepare valine?
54.The UV spectra of tryptophan,tyrosine,and phenylalanine are shown here. Each spectrum is that of a solution of the
amino acid,buffered at Calculate the approximate molar absorptivity of each of the three amino acids at 280nm.
55.A normal polypeptide and a mutant of the polypeptide were hydrolyzed by an endopeptidase under the same conditions. The
normal and mutant differ by one amino acid residue. The fingerprints of the peptides obtained from the normal and mutant

polypeptides are as shown. What kind of amino acid substitution occurred as a result of the mutation (That is,the substituted a
minoacid more or less polar than the original amino acid? Is its pI lower or higher?)
Electrophoresis at pH 6.5Paper chromatographyElectrophoresis at pH 6.5Paper chromatographyNormalMutant
0Absorbance.6.5.4.3.2.1230300
290280240Wavelength (nm)260310
270tryptophantyrosinephenylalanine250pH6.0.1103 Ma-AminoBRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 997
998CHAPTER 23Amino Acids, Peptides, 
and Proteins56.Determine the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide from the following results:
a.Complete hydrolysis of the peptide yields the following amino acids:Ala,Arg,Gly,2Lys,Met,Phe,Pro,2Ser,Tyr,Val.

b.Treatment with Edman
Õs reagent gives PTH-Val.
c.Carboxypeptidase A releases Ala.

d.Treatment with cyanogen bromide yields the following two peptides:
1.Ala,2Lys,Phe,Pro,Ser,Tyr

2.Arg,Gly,Met,Ser,Val
e.Treatment with chymotrypsin yields the following three peptides:
1.2Lys,Phe,Pro

2.Arg,Gly,Met,Ser,Tyr,Val

3.Ala,Ser
f.Treatment with trypsin yields the following three peptides:
1.Gly,Lys,Met,Tyr

2.Ala,Lys,Phe,Pro,Ser

3.Arg,Ser,Val
57.The C-terminal end of a protein extends into the aqueous environment surrounding the protein. The C-terminal amino acids are
Gln,Asp,2Ser,and three nonpolar amino acids. Assuming that the for formation of a hydrogen bond is and the
for removal of a hydrophobic group from water is calculate the for folding the C-terminal end of the
protein into the interior of the protein under the following conditions:

a.All the polar groups form one intramolecular hydrogen bond.

b.All but two of the polar groups form intramolecular hydrogen bonds.
58.Professor Mary Gold wanted to test her hypothesis that the disulfide bridges that form in many proteins do so after the mini
mumenergy conformation of the protein has been achieved. She treated a sample of lysozyme,an enzyme containing four disulfide

bridges,with 2-mercaptoethanol and then added urea to denature the enzyme. She slowly removed these reagents so that the

enzyme could refold and reform the disulfide bridges. The lysozyme she recovered had 80% of its original activity. What would b
ethe percent activity in the recovered enzyme if disulfide bridge formation were entirely random rather than determined by the

tertiary structure? Does this experiment support Professor Gold
Õs hypothesis?¡4 kcalmol,¡3 kcalmol¡BRUI23-959-998r2  29-03-2003  1:37 PM  Page 998
CH2CH2CH2CH2HGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCOCHHCNHCHONNHHNN
Acatalystis a substance that increases the rate of a
chemical reaction without itself being consumed or changed

in the reaction
. We have seen that the rate of a chemical reaction depends on
the energy barrier that must be overcome in the process of converting reactants into

products (Section3.7). The height of the Òenergy hillÓis indicated by the free energy

of activation A catalyst increases the rate of a chemical reaction by providing a

pathway with a lower 
A catalyst can decrease in one of three ways:
1.The catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions can follow different,but similar,mecha-
nisms,with the catalyst providing a way to convert the reactant into a 
less stablespecies(Figure24.1a).
2.The catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions can follow different,but similar,mecha-
nisms,with the catalyst providing a way to make 
the transition state more stable
(Figure24.1b).
GàGà.(Gà).24Catalysis999GàuncatalyzedFree energyProgress of the reactionGàcatalyzedb.GàuncatalyzedGàcatalyzedFree energyProgress of the reactiona.Figure 24.1
Reaction coordinate diagrams for an uncatalyzed reaction and for a catalyzed reaction. (a)The catalyst converts the
reactant to a less stable species. (b)The catalyst stabilizes the transition state.
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 999
When we say that a catalyst is neither consumed nor changed by a reaction,we do
not mean that it does not participate in the reaction. A catalyst 
mustparticipate in thereaction if it is going to make it go faster. What we mean is that a catalyst has the same

form after the reaction that it had before the reaction. Because the catalyst is not used

up during the reactionÑif it is used up in one step of the reaction,it must be regener-
ated in a subsequent stepÑonly a small amount of the catalyst is needed. Therefore,a
catalyst is added to a reaction mixture in small 
catalyticamounts,much less than the
number of moles of reactant.Notice that the stability of the original reactants and final products is the same in both
the catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions. In other words,the catalyst does not change the

equilibrium constant of the reaction. (Observe that is the same for the catalyzed and

uncatalyzed reactions in Figures24.1a,24.1b,and 24.2.) Because the catalyst does not

change the equilibrium constant,it does not change the 
amountof product formed dur-
ing the reaction. It changes only the rate
at which the product is formed.PROBLEM 1Which of the following parameters would be different for a reaction carried out in the pres-
ence of a catalyst,compared with the same reaction carried out in the absence of a catalyst?
(Hint:See Section3.7.)
24.1Catalysis in Organic ReactionsThere are several ways a catalyst can provide a more favorable pathway for an organ-
ic reaction:¥It can increase the susceptibility of an electrophile to nucleophilic attack.¥It can increase the reactivity of a nucleophile.
¥It can increase the leaving ability of a group by converting it into a weaker base.
In this chapter,we will look at some of the most common catalysts
Ñnucleophilic cat-alysts,acid catalysts,base catalysts,and metal-ion catalysts
Ñand the ways in which
they provide an energetically more favorable pathway for an organic reaction. We will

then see how the same modes of catalysis are used in enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
G¡, Hà, a, Sà, H¡, eq, Gà, S¡, rateG¡3.The catalyst can completely 
change the mechanism
of the reaction,providing an
alternative pathway with a smaller than that of the uncatalyzed reaction

(Figure24.2).
Gà1000CHAPTER 24CatalysisFree energyProgress of the reactionGàuncatalyzedGàcatalyzedFigure 24.2
Reaction coordinate diagrams foran uncatalyzed reaction and for a
catalyzed reaction. The catalyzed
reaction takes place by an
alternative and energetically more
favorable pathway.
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1000
Section 24.2Nucleophilic Catalysis
1001THE NOBEL PRIZEThroughout this text,you have found biographi-
cal sketches that give you some information
about the men and women who created the science you are

studying. You have seen that many of these people are Nobel

Prize winners. The Nobel Prize is considered by many to be

the most coveted award a scientist can receive. The awards

were established by Alfred Bernhard Nobel (1833Ð1896)
.The first prizes were awarded in 1901. Nobel was born in Stock-

holm,Sweden. When he was nine,he moved with his parents to

St. Petersburg,where his father manufactured the torpedoes and

submarine mines he had invented for the Russian government.

As a young man,Alfred did research on explosives in a factory

his father owned near Stockholm. In 1864,an explosion in the

factory killed his younger brother,causing Alfred to look for

ways to make it easier to handle and transport explosives. The

Swedish government would not allow the factory to be rebuilt

because of the many accidents that had occurred there. Nobel,

therefore,established an explosives factory in Germany,where,

in 1867,he discovered that if nitroglycerin were mixed with dia-

tomaceous earth,the mixture could be molded into sticks that

could not be set off without a detonating cap. Thus,Nobel in-

vented dynamite. He also invented blasting gelatin and smoke-

less powder. Although he was the inventor of explosives used by

the military,he was a strong supporter of peace movements.
The 355 patents Nobel held made him a wealthy man. He
never married,and when he died,his will stipulated that the

bulk of his estate ($9,200,000) be used to establish prizes to be

awarded to those who 
Òhave conferred the greatest benefit on
mankind.ÓHe instructed that the money be invested and the in-
terest earned each year be divided into five equal portions 
Òtobe awarded to the persons having made the most important

contributions in the fields of chemistry,physics,physiology 

or medicine,literature,and to the one who had done the most or

the best work toward fostering fraternity among nations,the
abolition of standing armies,and the holding and promotion of
peace congresses.ÓNobel also stipulated that in awarding the
prizes,no consideration be given to the nationality of the candi-

date,that each prize be shared by no more than three persons,

and that no prize be awarded posthumously.
Nobel gave instructions that the prizes for chemistry and
physics were to be awarded by the Royal Swedish Academy of

Sciences,for physiology or medicine by the Karolinska Insti-

tute in Stockholm,for literature by the Swedish Academy,and

for peace by a five-person committee elected by the Norwegian

Parliament. The deliberations are secret,and the decisions can-

not be appealed. In 1969,the Swedish Central Bank established

a prize in economics in Nobel
Õs honor. The recipient of this
prize is selected by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

On December 10
Ñthe anniversary of Nobel
Õs deathÑtheprizes are awarded in Stockholm,except for the peace prize,

which is awarded in Oslo.
Alfred Bernhard Nobel24.2Nucleophilic CatalysisA nucleophilic catalystincreases the rate of a reaction by acting as a nucleophile; itforms an intermediate by forming a covalent bond with one of the reactants.

Nucleophilic catalysis,therefore,is also called 
covalent catalysis
. A nucleophilic cat-
alyst increases the reaction rate by completely changing the mechanism of the reaction.
In the following reaction,iodide ion increases the rate of conversion of ethyl chlo-
ride into ethyl alcohol by acting as a nucleophilic catalyst:To understand how iodide ion catalyzes this reaction,we need to look at the mecha-
nism of the reaction both with and without the catalyst. In the absence of iodide ion,

ethyl chloride is converted into ethyl alcohol in a one-step reaction.
SN2IH2OCH3CH2ClHO
CH3CH2OHCl
a nucleophiliccatalystA nucleophilic catalyst forms anintermediate by forming a covalent
bond with a reactant.
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1001
1002CHAPTER 24CatalysisIf iodide ion is present in the reaction mixture,the reaction takes place by two succes-
sive reactions.
The first reaction in the catalyzed reaction is faster than the uncatalyzed reac-
tion because in a protic solvent,iodide ion is a better nucleophile than hydroxide ion,

which is the nucleophile in the uncatalyzed reaction (Section10.3). The second 

reaction in the catalyzed reaction is also faster than the uncatalyzed reaction because

iodide ion is a weaker base and therefore a better leaving group than chloride ion,the

leaving group in the uncatalyzed reaction. Thus,iodide ion increases the rate of for-

mation of ethanol by changing a relatively slow one-step reaction into a reaction with

two relatively fast steps (Figure24.2).
Iodide ion is a nucleophilic catalyst because it reacts as a nucleophile,forming a co-
valent bond with the reactant. The iodide ion that is consumed in the first reaction is

regenerated in the second,so it comes out of the reaction unchanged.
Another reaction in which a nucleophilic catalyst provides a more favorable path-
way by changing the mechanism of the reaction is the imidazole-catalyzed hydrolysis

of an ester.
Imidazole is a better nucleophile than water,so imidazole reacts faster with the ester
than water does. The acyl imidazole that is formed is particularly reactive because the

positively charged nitrogen makes imidazole a very good leaving group. Therefore,it

is hydrolyzed much more rapidly than the ester would have been. Because formation

of the acyl imidazole and its subsequent hydrolysis are both faster than ester hydroly-

sis,imidazole increases the rate of ester hydrolysis.
imidazolephenyl acetateacetic acidphenol
NNH
CH3COH
2OOCH3COHHO
Oa nucleophiliccatalystSN2SN2mechanism of the iodide-ion-catalyzed reactionCH3CH2ICl
CH3CH2ICl
CH3CH2HOI
CH3CH2OHI
SN2mechanism of the uncatalyzed reactionCH3CH2HOCl
CH3CH2OHCl
The 2001 Nobel Prize in chemistry
was awarded to 
K. Barry Sharpless
,William S. Knowles
,and 
RoyjiNoyroi
for their work in the field of
catalysis.William Knowles
,was born in 1917.
He received a Ph.D. from Columbia

University in 1942 and is a scientist

at Monsanto Company,St. Louis,

Missouri.Royji Noyroi
was born in 1938 inKobe,Japan. He received a Ph.D.

from Kyoto University and is a

Professor of materials science at

Nagoya University in Nagoya,Japan.

Knowles and Noyroi were cited for

their work on chirally catalyzed

hydrogenation.
K. Barry Sharpless
was cited for hiswork on chirally catalyzed oxidation

reactions (Section20.5).
OH2Oan acyl imidazolean esterCH3CONNH
OCH3COCH3COONNHCH3COHOHNNH
ONNH
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1002
Section 24.3Acid Catalysis
1003A proton is donated to the reactant 
in an acid-catalyzed reaction.
24.3Acid CatalysisAn acid catalyst increases the rate of a reaction by donating a proton to a reactant. For ex-
ample,the rate of hydrolysis of an ester is markedly increased by an acid catalyst 
How an acid catalyzes the hydrolysis of an ester can be understood by examining
the mechanism for the acid-catalyzed reaction. 
Donation of a proton to,and removal
of a proton from,an electronegative atom such as oxygen are fast steps
. Therefore,the
reaction has two slow steps:formation of the tetrahedral intermediate and collapse of

the tetrahedral intermediate. A catalyst must increase the rate of a slow step because

increasing the rate of a fast step will not increase the rate of the overall reaction.
The acid increases the rates of both slow steps of this reaction. It increases the rate
of formation of the tetrahedral intermediate by protonating the carbonyl oxygen,

thereby increasing the reactivity of the carbonyl group. We have seen that a protonated

carbonyl group is more susceptible to nucleophilic attack than an unprotonated car-

bonyl group because the protonated carbonyl group is more electrophilic. In other

words,the protonated carbonyl group is more susceptible to nucleophilic attack

(Section17.11). Increasing the reactivity of the carbonyl group by protonating it is an

example of providing a way to convert the reactant into a less stable (i.e.,more reac-

tive) species (Figure24.1a).
acid-catalyzed first slow stepCH3OCH3H2OCOHuncatalyzed first slow stepH2OCOCH3OCH3Cmechanism for acid-catalyzed ester hydrolysisHBslowslowCH3COCH3OOCH3OCH3CH3COCH3H2OHOHCH3COCH
3OHOHCH3COCH
3OH
OHCH3COCH
3HOH
OHHHBCH3CCH3OHOCH3COBHBBHBCH3COCH3H2OOCH3COHCH
3OHOan acidcatalyst(HB).A catalyst must increase the rate of a
slow step. Increasing the rate of a fast

step will not increase the rate of the

overall reaction.
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1003
1004CHAPTER 24CatalysisThe acid increases the rate of the second slow step by changing the basicity of the
group that is eliminated when the tetrahedral intermediate collapses. In the presence
of an acid,methanol of is eliminated; in the absence of an
acid,methoxide ion of is eliminated. Methanol is a weaker

base than methoxide ion,so it is more easily eliminated.
The mechanism for the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an ester shows that the reaction
can be divided into two distinct phases:formation of a tetrahedral intermediate and

collapse of a tetrahedral intermediate. There are three steps in each phase. Notice that

in each phase,the first step is a fast protonation step,the second step is a slow cat-

alyzed step that involves either breaking a bond or forming a bond,and the last

step is a fast deprotonation step (to regenerate the catalyst).
PROBLEM 2Compare each of the following mechanisms with the mechanism for each phase of the
acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an ester,indicating
a.similaritiesb.differences
1.acid-catalyzed formation of a hydrate (Section18.7)

2.acid-catalyzed conversion of an aldehyde into a hemiacetal (Section18.7)

3.acid-catalyzed conversion of a hemiacetal into an acetal (Section18.7)

4.acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of an amide (Section17.16)
There are two types of acid catalysis:
specific-acid catalysis
and general-acid
catalysis. In specific-acid catalysis
,the proton is fully transferred to the reactant 
before
the slow step of the reaction begins (Figure24.3a). In 
general-acid catalysis,the
proton is transferred to the reactant duringthe slow step of the reaction (Figure24.3b).
The mechanism for acid-catalyzed hydrolysis on p.1003 shows that the slow steps of

the reaction are specific-acid catalyzed.
ppCH3OCH3HCOHOHCH3OCH3COHOHacid-catalyzed second slow stepuncatalyzed second slow step
CH3OH15.7paCH3OH22.5pab. general-acid catalysisa. specific-acid catalysisProgress of the reactionRPPHProgress of the reactionAR HARH+R H+Free energyFree energyFigure 24.3
(a)Reaction coordinate diagram for a specific-acid-catalyzed reaction. (The proton is
completely transferred to the reactant before the slow step of the reaction begins.)
(b)Reaction coordinate diagram for a general-acid-catalyzed reaction. (The proton is

partially transferred to the reactant in the transition state of the slow step of the reaction.)BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1004
Section 24.3Acid Catalysis
1005Specific-acid and general-acid catalysts speed up a reaction in the same way
Ñbydonating a proton in order to make bond making and bond breaking easier. The two

types of acid catalysis differ only in the extent to which the proton is transferred in the

transition state of the slow step of the reaction. In a specific-acid-catalyzed reaction,

the transition state has a fully transferred proton,whereas in a general-acid-catalyzed

reaction,the transition state has a partially transferred proton (Figure24.3).
In the examples that follow,notice the difference in the extent of proton transfer
that has occurred when the nucleophile attacks the reactant. In specific-acid-catalyzed

attack by water on a carbonyl group,the nucleophile attacks a fully protonated car-

bonyl group. In general-acid-catalyzed attack by water on a carbonyl group,the car-

bonyl group becomes protonated as the nucleophile attacks it.
In specific-acid-catalyzed collapse of a tetrahedral intermediate,a fully protonated
leaving group is eliminated,whereas in general-acid-catalyzed collapse of a tetrahe-

dral intermediate,the leaving group picks up a proton as the group is eliminated.
A specific-acid catalyst must be an acid that is strong enough to protonate the reac-
tant fully before the slow step begins. A general-acid catalyst can be a weaker acid be-

cause it only partially transfers a proton in the transition state of the slow step.
PROBLEM 3The following reaction occurs by a general-acid-catalyzed mechanism:
Propose a mechanism for this reaction.CH2HOCH3OHBBOHCH3OHgeneral-acid-catalyzed elimination of the leaving groupCH3OCH3COHOHCH3COHHBCH3OHspecific-acid-catalyzed elimination of the leaving groupCH3OCH3COHOHOH
OHHCH3OHCOHCH3OCH3HCH2Ogeneral-acid-catalyzed attack by waterCH3OCH3CHBBOCH3OCH3COHHOHH2Ospecific-acid-catalyzed attack by waterCH3OCH3COHCH3OCH3COHHOHCH3OCH3COHBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1005
1006CHAPTER 24CatalysisPROBLEM 4SOLVED
An alcohol will not react with aziridine unless the reaction is catalyzed by an acid. Why is
a catalyst necessary?SOLUTIONAlthough relief of ring strain is sufficient by itself to cause an epoxide to
undergo a ring-opening reaction (Section12.7),it is not sufficient to cause an aziridine to

undergo a ring-opening reaction. A negatively charged nitrogen is a stronger base,and

therefore a poorer leaving group,than a negatively charged oxygen. An acid,therefore,is

needed to make the ring nitrogen a better leaving group by protonating it.
24.4Base CatalysisA base catalystincreases the rate of a reaction by removing a proton from the reac-
tant. For example,dehydration of a hydrate in the presence of hydroxide ion is a

base-catalyzed reaction. Hydroxide ion (the base) increases the rate of the reaction

by removing a proton from the neutral hydrate.
Removing a proton from the hydrate increases the rate of dehydration by providing
a pathway with a more stable transition state. The transition state for elimination of
from a negatively charged tetrahedral intermediate is more stable because a pos-
itive charge does not develop on the electronegative oxygen atom,as it does in the

transition state for elimination of from a neutral tetrahedral intermediate.
The foregoing base-catalyzed dehydration of a hydrate is an example of specific-
base catalysis. In 
specific-base catalysis
,the proton is completely removed from the
reactant before
the slow step of the reaction begins. In 
general-base catalysis,on the
other hand,the proton is removed from the reactant 
duringthe slow step of the reac-
tion. Compare the extent of proton transfer in the slow step of the preceding specific-

base-catalyzed dehydration with the extent of proton transfer in the slow step of the

following general-base-catalyzed dehydration:
OHOHOHslowClCH2CCH2ClOOHHClCH2CCH2ClOCOOHH
2OOHa hydrateCH2ClClCH2specific-base catalyzed dehydrationHClaziridineCH3OHHNH3NCH2CH2OCH3ClA proton is removed from the reactant
in a base-catalyzed reaction.
COHOHCOHOHtransition state for elimination of OH froma negatively charged tetrahedral intermediatetransition state for elimination of OH froma neutral tetrahedral intermediateBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1006
Section 24.5Metal-Ion Catalysis
1007In specific-base catalysis,the base has to be strong enough to remove a proton from
the reactant completely before the slow step begins. In general-base catalysis,the base

can be weaker because the proton is only partially transferred to the base in the transi-

tion state of the slow step. We will see that enzymes catalyze reactions using general-

acid and general-base catalytic groups because at physiological pH too small a

concentration of for specific-acid catalysis or for specific-

base catalysis is available.
PROBLEM 5The mechanism for hydroxide-ion-promoted ester hydrolysis is shown in Section17.12.
What catalytic role does hydroxide ion play in this mechanism?PROBLEM 6The following reaction occurs by a mechanism involving general-base catalysis:
Propose a mechanism for this reaction.24.5Metal-Ion CatalysisMetal ions exert their catalytic effect by coordinating (i.e.,complexing) with atoms
that have lone-pair electrons. In other words,metal ions are Lewis acids (Section1.21).

A metal ioncan increase the rate of a reaction in several ways.
¥It can make a reaction center more susceptible to receiving electrons,as in A in
the following diagram:
¥It can make a leaving group a weaker base,and therefore a better leaving group,
as in B.¥It can increase the rate of a hydrolysis reaction by increasing the nucleophilicityof water,as in C.
NuMetalMetalAHCOOHMetalMetalOH2CBCOCOCH
3OHmetal-bound watermetal-bound hydroxide ionbaseOCH2CH3CCH2OHCH3CH2OHOOOHOH1107 M(7.3),
OHHB
slowClCH2CCH2ClOOHHCOH2Oa hydrateBBClCH2CH2Clgeneral-base-catalyzed dehydrationTutorial:
Categorizing catalytic
pathwaysBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1007
1008CHAPTER 24CatalysisIn cases A and B,the metal ion exerts the same kind of catalytic effect as a pro-
ton does. In a reaction in which the metal ion has the same catalytic effect as a

proton (increasing the electrophilicity of a reaction center or decreasing the basici-
ty of a leaving group),the metal ion is often called an 
electrophilic catalyst
.In case C,metal-ion complexation of water increases its nucleophilicity by con-
verting it to metal bound hydroxide ion. The of water is 15.7. When a metal

ion complexes with water,it increases its tendency to lose a proton:The of

metal-bound water depends on the metal atom (Table24.1). When metal-bound

water loses a proton,metal-bound hydroxide ion is formed. Metal bound hydrox-

ide ion,while not as good a nucleophile as hydroxide ion,is a better nucleophile

than water.
papaTable 24.1The of Metal-Bound Water
pKa12.78.9
11.88.7

11.67.2

10.66.8
9.45.7
Be2Ni2Cu2Mn2Fe2Cd2Zn2Mg2Co2Ca2pKaM2pKaM2Now we will look at some examples of metal-ion-catalyzed reactions. catalyzes
the condensation of two molecules of the ethyl ester of glycine to form the ethyl ester of

glycylglycine. The actual catalyst is a cobalt complex,
Coordination of the metal ion with the carbonyl oxygen makes the carbonyl group
more susceptible to nucleophilic attack by stabilizing the developing negative charge

on the oxygen in the transition state.The decarboxylation of dimethyloxaloacetate can be catalyzed by either or 
In this reaction,the metal ion complexes with two oxygen atoms of the reactant. Com-
plexation increases the rate of decarboxylation by making the carbonyl group more

susceptible to receiving the electrons left behind when is eliminated.
CO2Cu2or Al3dimethyloxaloacetateOCOCCH3CH3COCOOOCOCCHCH
3CH3CO2OAl3.Cu2H2NCH2COCH2CH3OCH2CH3OCOCoCH2NH2Co22 H2NCH2COCH2CH3OH2NCH2CNHCH2COCH2CH3CH3CH2OHOO[Co(ethylenediamine)2]2.Co2BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1008
The hydrolysis of methyl trifluoroacetate has two slow steps. increases the
rate of the first slow step by providing metal-bound hydroxide ion,a better nucleophile

than water. increases the rate of the second slow step by decreasing the basicity

of the group that is eliminated from the tetrahedral intermediate.PROBLEM 7The rate constant for the uncatalyzed reaction of two molecules of glycine ethyl ester to form
glycylglycine ethyl ester is In the presence of the

rate constant is What rate enhancement does the catalyst provide?
PROBLEM 8Although metal ions increase the rate of decarboxylation of dimethyloxaloacetate,they

have no effect on the rate of decarboxylation either of the monoethyl ester of dimethylox-

aloacetate or of acetoacetate. Explain why this is so.PROBLEM 9The hydrolysis of glycinamide is catalyzed by Propose a mech-

anism for this reaction.Co2H2NCH2CNH2OH2OH2NCH2COONH4[Co(ethylenediamine)2]2.dimethyloxaloacetateacetoacetatemonoethyl ester ofdimethyloxaloacetateOCOCCH3CH3COCOOOOCCH2OCOCH3OCOCOCCCH3CH3CH3CH2O1.5106 s1 M1.[Co(ethylenediamine)2]2,0.6 s1 M1.Zn2Zn2OCOOOOCCH3CH3CCCuCuOOOCCH3CH3CCCO
2Section 24.5Metal-Ion Catalysis
1009ZnZnZnZnZnZnOH2HOHslowslowCF3OCH3H2OCOCF3OHCOCF3OCH3COHOCF3OCH3COHOCF3OCH3COHOOH2OCH3metal-boundhydroxide iondecreases the
basicity of the
leaving groupBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1009
1010CHAPTER 24Catalysis24.6Intramolecular ReactionsThe rate of a chemical reaction is determined by the number of molecular collisionswith sufficient energy 
andwith the proper orientation in a given period of time
(Section3.7):
Because a catalyst decreases the energy barrier of a reaction,it increases the reaction
rate by increasing the number of collisions that occur with sufficient energy to over-

come the barrier.
The rate of a reaction can also be increased by increasing the frequency of the col-
lisions andthe number of collisions that take place with the proper orientation. We
have seen that an intramolecular reaction that results in formation of a five-or a six-

membered ring occurs more readily than the analogous intermolecular reaction. This

is because an intramolecular reaction has the advantage that the reacting groups are

tied together in the same molecule,giving them a better chance of finding each other

than if they were in two different molecules in a solution of the same concentration

(Section11.11). As a result,the frequency of the collisions increases.
If,in addition to being in the same molecule,the reacting groups are juxtaposed in
a way that increases the probability that they will collide with each other in the proper

orientation,the rate of the reaction is further increased. The relative rates shown in

Table24.2demonstrate the enormous increase that occurs in the rate of a reaction

when the reacting groups are properly juxtaposed.Rate constants for a series of reactions are generally compared in terms of relative
rates because relative rates allow one to see immediately how much faster one reaction

is than another. 
Relative rates
are obtained by dividing the rate constant for each 
of the reactions by the rate constant of the slowest reaction in the series. Because an

intramolecular reaction is a first-order reaction (it has units of ) and an inter-

molecular reaction is a second-order reaction (it has units of the relative

rates in Table24.2have units of molarity (M) (Section3.7).
The relative rates shown in Table24.2are also called 
effective molarities
. Effective
molarityis the concentration of the reactant that would be required in an 
intermolecu-larreaction for it to have the same rate as the 
intramolecular
reaction. In other words,
the effective molarity is the advantage given to a reaction by having the reacting

groups in the same molecule. In some cases,juxtaposing the reacting groups provides

such an enormous increase in rate that the effective molarity is greater than the con-

centration of the reactant in its solid state!The first reaction shown in Table24.2(A) is an intermolecular reaction between an
ester and a carboxylate ion. The second reaction (B) has the same reacting groups in a

single molecule. The rate of the intramolecular reaction is 1000 times faster than the

rate of the intermolecular reaction.The reactant in B has four bonds that are free to rotate,whereas the reactant
in D has only three such bonds. Conformers in which the large groups are rotated away

from each other are more stable. However,when these groups are pointed away from

each other,they are in an unfavorable conformation for reaction. Because the reactant

in D has fewer bonds that are free to rotate,the groups are less apt to be in a confor-

mation that is unfavorable for a reaction. Therefore,reaction D is faster than reaction

B. The relative rate constants for the reactions shown in Table24.2are quantitatively
CCrelative ratefirst-order rate constantsecond-order rate constanttime1time1 M1Mtime1 M1),time1rate of reactionnumber of collisionsunit of timefraction withsufficient energyfraction withproper orientationBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1010
Section 24.6Intramolecular Reactions
1011Table 24.2Relative Rates of an Intermolecular Reaction and Five Intramolecular Reactions
ReactionRelative reaction rate
A1.0BCDEF5107 MOCBr
OOOBrOOCOOOO1107 MOOOCBr
HHOOBrOOCO2.2105 MOCBr
OOBrOOCOOORiso-C3H71.3106 MRCH32.3104 MOOOCBr
OOBrOOCORRRR1103 MOOOCBr
OOBrOOCOBrBr
CH3CCCH
3OOOCH3COOOOCH3COrelated to the calculated probability of forming the conformation in which the car-
boxylate ion is in position to attack the carbonyl carbon.
four carbonÐcarbon bonds can rotatethree carbonÐcarbonbonds can rotateOCOOCOBrOCOOCOBrBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1011
1012CHAPTER 24CatalysisReaction C is faster than reaction B because the alkyl substituents of the reactant in C
decrease the available volume for rotation of the reactive groups away from each other.

Thus,there is a greater probability that the molecule will be in a conformation with the

reacting groups positioned for ring closure. This is called the 
gem-dialkyl effect
(orThorpeÐIngold effect) because the two alkyl substituents are bonded to the same
(geminal) carbon. Comparing the rate when the substituents are methyl groups with the
rate when the substituents are isopropyl groups,we see that the rate is further increased

when the size of the alkyl groups is increased.
The increased rate of reaction E is due to the double bond that prevents the reacting
groups from rotating away from each other. The bicyclic compound in F reacts even

faster,because the reacting groups are locked in the proper orientation for reaction.
PROBLEM 10The relative rate of reaction of the cis alkene (E) is given in Table24.2. What would you
expect the relative rate of reaction of the trans isomer to be?
24.7Intramolecular CatalysisJust as putting two reacting groups in the same molecule increases the rate of a reac-
tion compared with having the groups in separate molecules,putting a 
reacting group
and a catalystin the same molecule increases the rate of a reaction compared withhaving them in separate molecules. When a catalyst is part of the reacting molecule,

the catalysis is called intramolecular catalysis. Intramolecular nucleophilic catalysis,intramolecular general-acid or general-base catalysis,and intramolecular metal-ion

catalysis all occur. Intramolecular catalysis is also known as 
anchimeric assistance(anchimeric
means Òadjacent partsÓin Greek). LetÕs now look at some examples of in-
tramolecular catalysis.The following intramolecular general-base-catalyzed enolization reaction is con-
siderably faster than the analogous intermolecular general-base-catalyzed reaction:
When chlorocyclohexane reacts with an aqueous solution of ethanol,an alcohol
and an ether are formed. Two products are formed because there are two nucleophiles

(and ) in the solution.
CH3CH2OHH2OHClClOHOCH2CH3CH3CH2OHH2ORCOintermolecular general-base catalysisOCH3COCCH3HRCOHOOCH3CCCH3intramolecular general-base catalysisOOCH3CCOCCH3HOOCH3CCOH
CCH3BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1012
Section 24.7Intramolecular Catalysis
10133-D Molecules:cis-2-Thiophenyl-chlorocyclohexane;
trans-2-Thiophenyl-chlorocyclohexaneA 2-thio-substituted chlorocyclohexane undergoes the same reaction. However,the
rate of the reaction depends on whether the thio substituent is cis or trans to the chloro

substituent. If it is trans,the 2-thio-substituted compound reacts about 70,000 times

faster than the unsubstituted compound. But if it is cis,the 2-thio-substituted com-

pound reacts a little more slowly than the unsubstituted compound.
What accountsfor the much faster reaction of the trans-substituted compound? In
this reaction,the thio substituent is an intramolecular nucleophilic catalyst. It

displaces the chloro substituent by attacking the back side of the carbon to which the

chloro substituent is attached. Back-side attack requires both substituents to be in axial

positions,and only the trans isomer can have both of its substituents in axial positions

(Section2.14). Subsequent attack by water or ethanol on the sulfonium ion is rapid

because the positively charged sulfur is an excellent leaving group and breaking the

three-membered ring releases strain.PROBLEM 11Show all the products,and their configurations,that would be obtained from solvolysis of
the trans-substituted compound illustrated in the preceding diagram.The rate of hydrolysis of phenyl acetate is increased about 150-fold at neutral
pH by the presence of a carboxylate ion in the ortho position. The 
ortho-carboxyl-substituted ester is commonly known as aspirin (Section19.9). In the following

reactions,the reactants and products are shown in the form that predominates at

physiological pH (7.3).The ortho-carboxylate group is an intramolecular general-base catalystthat increases
the nucleophilicity of water,thereby increasing the rate of formation of the tetrahedral

intermediate.CH3COOOCOHHOrelative rate  1CH3COOH2OCH3COHOOrelative rate  150CH3COOH2OOOCOOCCH3COHOOSC6H5HClSC6H5SC6H5ClOHOCH2CH3CH3CH2OHH2O3-D Molecule:AspirinC6H5SClHO
   HC6H5SC6H5SOHHClC6H5SOHHAU:OKas changed?
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1013
If nitro groups are put on the benzene ring,the 
ortho-carboxyl substituent acts as an
intramolecular nucleophilic catalystinstead of an intramolecular general-base cata-
lyst. It increases the rate of the hydrolysis reaction by converting the ester into an an-
hydride,and an anhydride is more rapidly hydrolyzed than an ester.
PROBLEM 12SOLVED
What causes the mode of catalysis to change from general base to nucleophilic in the hy-
drolysis of an ortho-carboxyl-substituted phenyl acetate?
SOLUTIONThe ortho-carboxyl substituent is in position to form a tetrahedral intermedi-
ate. If the carboxyl group in the tetrahedral intermediate is a better leaving group than the

phenoxy group,the carboxyl group will be eliminated preferentially from the intermediate.

This will reform the starting material,which will be hydrolyzed by a general-base-catalyzed

mechanism (path A). However,if the phenoxy group is a better leaving group than the car-

boxyl group,the phenoxy group will be eliminated,thereby forming the anhydride,and the

reaction will have occurred by a mechanism involving nucleophilic catalysis (path B).
PROBLEM 13Why do the nitro groups change the relative leaving tendencies of the carboxyl and phenyl

groups in the tetrahedral intermediate in Problem12?
PROBLEM 14Whether the ortho-carboxyl substituent acts as an intramolecular general-base catalyst oras an intramolecular nucleophilic catalyst can be determined by carrying out the hydroly-

sis of aspirin with water and determining whether is incorporated into

ortho-carboxyl-substituted phenol. Explain the results that would be obtained with the two
types of catalysis.18O18O-labeled1014CHAPTER 24CatalysisH2OCH3COOOCNO2O2NNO2O2NNO2O2NNO2O2NOOOCHOOCH3COOCCH3COOOCCCH3OOOan esteran anhydride
OH2OH2OCH3COOOCABBAtetrahedral intermediateOOOCHOOOCH3COOCCH3COOOCCCH3OOONO2O2NNO2O2NNO2O2NNO2O2NBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1014
Section 24.8Catalysis in Biological Reactions
1015The following reaction,in which catalyzes the hydrolysis of the ester,is an ex-
ample of intramolecular metal-ion catalysis:The metal ion complexes with an oxygen and a nitrogen of the reactant,as well as with
a molecule of water. The metal ion increases the rate of the reaction by positioning the

water molecule and increasing its nucleophilicity by converting it to metal-bound

hydroxide.24.8Catalysis in Biological ReactionsEssentially all organic reactions that occur in biological systems require a catalyst.
Most biological catalysts are 
enzymes,which are globular proteins (Section 23.11).
Each biological reaction is catalyzed by a different enzyme. Enzymes are extraordi-

narily good catalysts
Ñthey can increase the rate of an intermolecular reaction by as
much as In contrast,rate enhancements achieved by nonbiological catalysts in

intermolecular reactions are seldom greater than The reactant of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is called a substrate. The enzyme
has a pocket or cleft known as an active site. The substrate specifically fits and

binds to the 
active site
,and all the bond-making and bond-breaking steps of the
reaction occur while the substrate is at that site. Enzymes differ from nonbiological

catalysts in that they are specific for the reactant whose reaction they catalyze

(Section5.20). Not all enzymes have the same degree of specificity. Some are spe-

cific for a single compound and will not tolerate even the slightest variation in

structure,whereas some catalyze the reaction of an entire family of compounds

with related structures. The specificity of an enzyme for its substrate is an example

of the phenomenon known as 
molecular recognition
Ñthe ability of one moleculeto recognize another.
The specificity of an enzyme results from its conformation and the particular
amino acid side chains that make up the active site. For example,a negatively

charged side chain of an amino acid at the active site of an enzyme can associate

with a positively charged group on the substrate,a hydrogen-bond donor on the

enzyme can associate with a hydrogen-bond acceptor on the substrate,and hydro-

phobic groups on the enzyme associate with hydrophobic groups on the substrate.
The specificity of an enzyme for its substrate has been described by the lock-and-

key model. In the 
lock-and-key model
,the substrate is said to fit the enzyme much
as a key fits a lock.
10,000-fold.1016.OH2NiHCOCH
3HNN
OHOOHCOCH
3HNN
OHONiH2OCH3OHCOCH
3HNN
OHONi2COH
HNN
OHONi2AU:OKas changed?
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1015
1016CHAPTER 24CatalysisFigure 24.4
The structure of hexokinase beforebinding its substrate is shown in
red. The structure of hexokinase
after binding its substrate is shown
in green.The energy released as a result of binding the substrate to the enzyme can be used
to induce a change in the conformation of the enzyme,leading to more precise binding

between the substrate and the active site. This change in conformation of the enzyme

is known as induced fit. In the 
induced-fit model
,the shape of the active site does not
become completely complementary to the shape of the substrate until the enzyme has

bound the substrate.An example of induced fit is shown in Figure24.4. The three-dimensional structure of
the enzyme hexokinase is shown before and after binding glucose,its substrate. Notice

the change in conformation that occurs upon binding the substrate.The following are some of the most important factors that contribute to the remark-
able catalytic ability of enzymes:¥Reacting groups are brought together at the active site in the proper orientation for
reaction. This is analogous to the way that proper positioning of reacting groups

increases the rate of intramolecular reactions (Section24.6).
¥Some of the amino acid side chains of the enzyme serve as catalytic groups,and
many enzymes have metal ions at their active site that act as catalysts. These

species are positioned in orientations relative to the substrate needed for cataly-

sis. This is analogous to the rate enhancements observed for intramolecular catal-

ysis by acids,bases,and metal ions (Section 24.7).
¥Groups on the enzyme can stabilize an intermediate and,therefore,the transition state
leading to the intermediate by van der Waals interactions,electrostatic interactions,

and hydrogen bonding (Figure24.1b).
3-D Molecules:Hexokinase;
Hexokinase bound to its
substratelock-and-key modelinduced-fit model
a.b.
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1016
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1017As we look at some examples of enzyme-catalyzed reactions,notice that the
functional groups on the enzyme side chains are the same functional groups you are
used to seeing in simple organic compounds,and the modes of catalysis used by

enzymes are the same as the modes of catalysis used in organic reactions. The

remarkable catalytic ability of enzymes stems in part from their ability to use

several modes of catalysis in the same reaction. Factors other than those listed can

contribute to the increased rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions,but not all factors

are employed by every enzyme. We will consider some of these factors when we

discuss individual enzymes. Now let
Õs look at the mechanisms for five enzyme-
catalyzed reactions.24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed ReactionsMechanism for Carboxypeptidase ACarboxypeptidase A is an 
exopeptidase
Ñan enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis ofthe C-terminal peptide bond in peptides and proteins,releasing the C-terminal amino

acid (Section23.12).
Carboxypeptidase A is a 
metalloenzymeÑan enzyme that contains a tightly bound
metal ion. The metal ion in carboxypeptidase A is Carboxypeptidase A is one of

several hundred enzymes known to contain zinc. In bovine pancreatic carboxypeptidase

A,is boundto the enzyme at its active site by forming a complex with Glu72,

His196,and His69,as well as with a water molecule (Figure24.5). (The source of the

enzyme is specified because,although carboxypeptidase A
Õs from different sources fol-
low the same mechanism,they have slightly different primary structures.)
Several groups at the active site of carboxypeptidase A participate in binding the
substrate in the optimum position for reaction (Figure24.5). Arg145 forms two hy-

drogen bonds and Tyr248 forms one hydrogen bond with the C-terminal carboxyl

group of the substrate. The side chain of the C-terminal amino acid is positioned in a

hydrophobic pocket,which is why carboxypeptidase A is not active if the C-terminal

amino acid is arginine or lysine. Apparently,the long,positively charged side chains of

these amino acid residues (Table23.1) cannot fit into the nonpolar pocket. The reac-

tion proceeds as follows:
¥When the substrate binds to the active site,partially complexes with the oxy-
gen of the carbonyl group of the amide that will be hydrolyzed (Figure24.5).
polarizes the carbonÐoxygen double bond,making the carbonyl carbon more
susceptible to nucleophilic attack and stabilizing the negative charge that develops

on the oxygen atom in the transition state that leads to the tetrahedral intermediate.

Arg127 also increases the carbonyl group
Õs electrophilicity and stabilizes thedeveloping negative charge on the oxygen atom in the transition state. also

complexes with water,thereby making it a better nucleophile. Glu270 functions as

a general-base catalyst,further increasing water
Õs nucleophilicity.
Zn2Zn2Zn2Zn2Zn2.NHCHCOH2ONHCHCORRNHCHCROOH3NCHCONHCHCORRNHCHCOROOcarboxypeptidase A3-D Molecule:Carboxypeptidase ABRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1017
1018CHAPTER 24CatalysisCHCH2CH2CH2H2NH2NHNNH2NH2OC    NHCHCOCOH3NCHCONH2Arg 145Tyr 248Arg 127NHCCOOZnCOGlu 270His 69Glu 72CCCOOOHOHHOHis 196OOOOOOcarboxypeptidase AOverall ReactionNHNCHCH2H2NH2NHNNH2NNH2Arg 145Tyr 248Arg 127NHCCOOZnCOGlu 270His 69Glu 72CCCOOOHOHHOHis 196NHNCOCHCH2H2NH2NH2NNH2Arg 145Tyr 248Arg 127NH2CCOOHOOZnCGlu 270His 69Glu 72CCOOOHOHis 196NHNNHNCOCHCH2H2NH2NH2NNH2Arg 145Tyr 248Arg 127NH3CCOOOOZnCGlu 270His 69Glu 72CCOOOHOHis 196NHNNHNhydrophobicpocketFigure 24.5
Proposed mechanism for the carboxypeptidase AÐcatalyzed hydrolysis of a peptide bond.¥In the second step of the reaction,Glu270 functionsas a general-acid catalyst,
increasing the leaving tendency of the amino group. When the reaction is over,

the amino acid (phenylalanine in this example) and the peptide with one less

amino acid residue dissociate from the enzyme,and another molecule of
Tutorial:
Carboxypeptidase A
mechanismBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1018
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1019substrate binds to the active site. It has been suggested that the unfavorable
electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged carboxyl group of the

peptide product and the negatively charged Glu270 residue facilitates the re-

lease of the product from the enzyme.PROBLEM 15Which of the following C-terminal peptide bonds would be more readily cleaved by car-
boxypeptidase A?Explain.PROBLEM 16Carboxypeptidase A has esterase activity as well as peptidase activity. In other words,the
compound can hydrolyze ester bonds as well as peptide bonds. When carboxypeptidase A hy-

drolyzes ester bonds,Glu270 acts as a nucleophilic catalyst instead of a general-base catalyst.

Propose a mechanism for the carboxypeptidase A-catalyzed hydrolysis of an ester bond.
Mechanism for the Serine Proteases
Trypsin,chymotrypsin,and elastase are members of a large group of 
endopeptidasesknown collectively as serine proteases. Recall that an endopeptidase cleaves a peptide bond

that is not at the end of a peptide chain (Section23.12). They are called 
proteases
becausethey catalyze the hydrolysis of protein peptide bonds. They are called 
serine proteases
be-cause they all have a serine residue at the active site that participates in the catalysis.
The various serine proteases have similar primary structures,suggesting that they
are evolutionarily related. They all have the same three catalytic residues at the active

site:an aspartate,a histidine,and a serine. But they have one important difference
Ñthe composition of the pocket at the active site that binds the side chain of the amino

acid residue undergoing hydrolysis (Figure24.6). This pocket is what gives the serine

proteases their different specificities (Section23.12).
Ser-Ala-PheorSer-Ala-AspHCOOGly 216HOCH2HAsp 189Gly 226Ser 190HGly 216HGly 226CHCH3CH3Val 216CH3CHOHThr 226trypsinchymotrypsinelastase
Figure 24.6
The binding pockets in trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase. The negatively charged aspartateis shown in red, and the relatively nonpolar amino acids are shown in green. The structures
of the binding pockets explain why trypsin binds long, positively charged amino acids;
chymotrypsin binds flat, nonpolar amino acids; and elastase binds only small amino acids.BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1019
1020CHAPTER 24CatalysisTutorial:
Serine protease mechanismThe pocket in trypsin is narrow and has a serine and a negatively charged aspartate
carboxyl group at its bottom. The shape and charge of the binding pocket cause it to

bind long,positively charged amino acid side chains (Lys and Arg). This is why trypsin

hydrolyzes peptide bonds on the C-side of arginine and lysine residues. The pocket in

chymotrypsin is narrow and is lined with nonpolar amino acids,so chymotrypsin

cleaves on the C-side of amino acids with flat,nonpolar side chains (Phe,Tyr,Trp). In

elastase,two glycines on the sides of the pocket in trypsin and in chymotrypsin are re-

placed by relatively bulky valine and threonine residues. Consequently,only small

amino acids can fit into the pocket. Elastase,therefore,hydrolyzes peptide bonds on the

C-side of small amino acids (Gly and Ala).
The mechanism for bovine chymotrypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis of a peptide bond is
shown in Figure24.7. The other serine proteases follow the same mechanism. The

reaction proceeds as follows:
¥As a result of binding the flat,nonpolar side chain in the pocket,the amide linkage
that is to be hydrolyzed is positioned very close to Ser195. His57 functions as a

general-base catalyst,increasing the nucleophilicity of serine,which attacks the

carbonyl group. This process is helped by Asp102,which uses its negative charge

to stabilize the resulting positive charge on His57 and to position the five-membered

ring so that its basic N atom is close to the OH of serine. The stabilization of a

charge by an opposite charge is called 
electrostatic catalysis
. Formation of the
tetrahedral intermediate causes a slight change in the conformation of the protein

that allows the negatively charged oxygen to slip into a previously unoccupied area

of the active site known as the 
oxyanion hole. Once in the oxyanion hole,the neg-
atively charged oxygen can hydrogen bond with two peptide groups (Gly193 and

Ser195),which stabilizes the tetrahedral intermediate.
¥In the next step,the tetrahedral intermediate collapses,expelling the amino group.
This is a strongly basic group that cannot be expelled without the participation of

His57,which acts as a general-acid catalyst. The product of the second step is an

acyl-enzyme intermediate
because the serine group of the enzyme has been
acylated. (An acyl group has been put on it.)
¥The third step is just like the first step,except that water instead of serine is the nu-
cleophile. Water attacks the acyl group of the acyl-enzyme intermediate,with His57

functioning as a general-base catalyst to increase water
Õs nucleophilicity andAsp102 stabilizing the positively charged histidine residue.
¥In the finalstep of the reaction,the tetrahedral intermediate collapses,expelling
serine. His57 functions as a general-acid catalyst in this step,increasing serine
Õsleaving tendency.
The mechanism for chymotrypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis shows the importance of
histidine as a catalytic group. Because the of the imidazole ring of histidine
is close to neutrality,histidine can act both as a general-acid catalyst and
as a general-base catalyst at physiological pH.Much informationabout the relationship between the structure of a protein and its
function has been determined by site-specific mutagenesis
,a technique that replaces one
amino acid of a protein with another. For example,when Asp102 of chymotrypsin is

replaced with Asn102,the enzyme
Õs ability to bind the substrate is unchanged,but its abil-
ity to catalyze the reaction decreases to less than 0.05% of the value for the native enzyme.

Clearly,Asp102 must be involved in the catalytic process. We have seen that its role is to

position histidine and use its negative charge to stabilize histidine
Õs positive charge.
CHCH2COOside chain of an aspartate (Asp) residueCH
CH2CONH2side chain of an asparagine (Asn) residuepa6.0pa3-D Molecule:Chymotrypsin with bound
inhibitorBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1020
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1021CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2H2OCHC    NHCHC    OH3NHGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCOCHHCNHCHONNHOOOchymotrypsinhydrophobicpocketHNN
Overall ReactionCH2CH2CH2CH2HGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCOCHHCNHONNHNHNoxyanionholeCH2CH2CH2CH2HGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCOCHHCHOCH
ONNHNHNCH2CH2CH2HGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCHHCOCCH
ONNHNCH2CH2CH2CH2NH2HGly193Ser195Asp102His57OOCOCHHHCOCHONNHNHNHNNH2NH3CHacyl-enzyme
intermediateFigure 24.7
Proposed mechanism for the chymotrypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis of a peptide bond.BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1021
PROBLEM 17Arginine and lysine side chains fit into trypsin
Õs binding pocket. One of these side chains
forms a direct hydrogen bond with serine and an indirect hydrogen bond (mediated

through a water molecule) with aspartate. The other side chain forms direct hydrogen

bonds with both serine and aspartate. Which is which?
PROBLEM 18Serine proteases do not catalyze hydrolysis if the amino acid at the hydrolysis site is a
D-amino acid. Trypsin,for example,cleaves on the C-side of 
L-Arg and 
L-Lys,but not on
the C-side of D-Arg and 
D-Lys. Explain.
Mechanism for Lysozyme
Lysozyme is an enzyme that destroys bacterial cell walls. These cell walls are composed
of alternating 
N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) and 
N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) units.
Lysozyme destroys the cell wall by catalyzing the hydrolysis of the NAM
ÐNAG bond.
The active site of hen egg-white lysozyme binds six sugar residues of the substrate.
The many amino acid residues involved in binding the substrate in the correct position

in the active site are shown in Figure24.8. The six sugar residues are labeled A,B,C,

D,E,and F. The carboxylic acid substituent of NAM cannot fit into the binding site for

C or E. This means that NAM units must be in the sites for B,D,and F. Hydrolysis oc-

curs between D and E.Lysozyme has two catalytic groups at the active site:Glu35 and Asp52 (Figure24.9).
Once it was determined that the enzyme-catalyzed reaction takes place with retention of

configuration at the anomeric carbon,it could be concluded that it cannot be a one-step
reaction; the reaction must involve at least two steps and,therefore,must form an
intermediate. Although lysozyme was the first enzyme to have its mechanism studied
Ñand the mechanism has been studied extensively for almost 40 years
Ñonly recentlyhave data been obtained that support the mechanism shown in Figure24.9:
¥In the first step of the reaction,Asp52 acts as a nucleophilic catalyst and attacks
C-1 of the NAM residue,displacing the leaving group. Glu35 acts as a general-

acid catalyst,protonating the leaving group and thereby making it a weaker base
SN2H2OR    CH3CHCOOCOCH3CH2OHCH2OHCH2OHCH2OHCH2OHCH2OHOOHONHCOCH3OORONHCOCH3OOOHONHNAGNAGNAMCOCH3OOHONHCOCH3OORONHCOCH3OHHOOOHONHNAGNAGNAMlysozyme-catalyzed hydrolysis occurs here1022CHAPTER 24CatalysisBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1022
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1023CH2CH2OHTrp62Trp63C 107HHHOOOHOROOOOHH2NNHH2NCNHCH2Asp 101OOHROOOOHCH2OHHOCH3ABNAGNAMCNAGDNAMNAGFNAMNHHOCCOOOCH2ROHH2NOOONH2NH2Asn44Arg114Asn37Gln57OHOOOCH2OHO59 NHC 57OC 34O35 CONCH3OCCH3NHOCCH3NHOCCH3NHOCCOCCH3OCNNElysozyme cleavageFigure 24.8
The amino acids at the active site of lysozyme that are involved in
binding the substrate.and a better leaving group. Site-specific mutagenesis studies show that when
Glu35 is replaced by Asp,the enzyme has only weak activity. Apparently,Asp

does not have the optimal distance and angle to the oxygen atom that needs to be

protonated. When Glu35 is replaced by Ala,an amino acid that cannot act as an

acid catalyst,the activity of the enzyme is completely lost.
¥In the second step of the reaction,Glu35 acts as a general-base catalyst to
increase water
Õs nucleophilicity.The configuration at C-1 of the NAM residue is
retained because the enzyme shields one side of the intermediate,so water is

able to attack from only one side.3-D Molecule:Lysozyme with bound NAG
4BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1023
1024CHAPTER 24CatalysisRONHHNAMCH2OHCH3COOOOOOCOCOHONHNAGCH2OHCH3CCH2Asp 52OOCOOCH2Asp 52CH2CH2Glu 35COOHHCH2CH2Glu 35EDRONHCH2OHCH3CODHOHONHCH2OHCH3COOOERONHCH2OHCH3COOOHOOHCOHONHCH2OHCH3CCH2Asp 52OOEDOCOCH2HCH2Glu 35Figure 24.9
Proposed mechanism for the lysozyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of a cell wall.PROBLEM 19If were used to hydrolyze lysozyme,which ring would contain the label,NAM or
NAG?
A plot of the activity of an enzyme as a function of the pH of the reaction mixture
is called a pHÐactivity profile
or a pHÐrate profile
(Section18.6). The pH
Ðactivity
profile for lysozyme is shown in Figure24.10. It is a bell-shaped curve with the maxi-

mum rate occurring at about pH 5.3. The pH at which the enzyme is 50% active is 3.8

on the ascending leg of the curve and 6.7 on the descending leg. These pH values cor-

respond to the values of the enzyme
Õs catalytic groups. (This is true for all bell-shaped pHÐrate profiles,provided that the values are at least two units apart.
If the difference between them is less than two units,the precise values of the

catalytic groups must be determined in other ways.)
papapapapaH2O18BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1024
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1025345pHEnzyme activity678pKa  6.7pKa  3.8Figure 24.10
Dependence of lysozyme activity onthe pH of the reaction mixture.The given by the ascending leg is the of a group that is catalytically active
in its basic form. When that group is fully protonated,the enzyme is not active. As the

pH of the reaction mixture increases,a larger fraction of the group is present in its basic

form,and as a result,the enzyme shows increasing activity. Similarly,the given by

the descending leg is the of a group that is catalytically active in its acidic form.

Maximum catalytic activity occurs when the group is fully protonated; activity decreas-

es with increasing pH because a greater fraction of the group lacks a proton.From the lysozyme mechanism shown in Figure24.9,we can conclude that Asp52
is the group with a of 3.8 and Glu35 is the group with a of 6.7. The pH
Ðactivity profile indicates that lysozyme is maximally active when Asp52 is in its basic

form and Glu35 is in its acidic form.
Table23.2shows that the of aspartic acid is 3.86 and the of glutamic acid is
4.25. The of Asp52 agrees with the of aspartic acid,but the of Glu35 is

much greater than the of glutamic acid. Why is the of the glutamic acid residue

at the active site of the enzyme so much greater than the given for glutamic acid in

the table? The values in the table were determined in water. In the enzyme,Asp52

is surrounded by polar groups,which means that its should be close to the de-

termined in water,a polar solvent. Glu35,however,is in a predominantly nonpolar mi-

croenvironment,so its should be greater than the determined in water. We have

seen that the of a carboxylic acid is greater in a nonpolar solvent because there is

less tendency to form charged species in nonpolar solvents (Section10.10).
Part of the catalytic efficiency of lysozyme results from its ability to provide differ-
ent solvent environments at the active site. This allows one catalytic group to exist in

its acidic form at the same surrounding pH at which a second catalytic group exists in

its basic form. This property is unique to enzymes; chemists cannot provide different

solvent environments for different parts of nonenzymatic systems.
PROBLEM 20When apples that have been cut are exposed to oxygen,an enzyme-catalyzed reaction
causes them to turn brown. They can be prevented from turning brown by coating them

with lemon juice Explain why this is so.
Mechanism for Glucose-6-phosphate IsomeraseGlycolysisis the name given to the series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions responsible
for converting 
D-glucose into two molecules of pyruvate (Sections19.21and 25.1).
The second reaction in glycolysis is an isomerization reaction that converts 
D-glucose-6-phosphate to D-fructose-6-phosphate. Recall that the open-chain form of glucose is
an aldohexose,whereas the open-chain form of fructose is a ketohexose. Therefore,

the enzyme that catalyzes this reactionÑglucose-6-phosphate isomeraseÑconverts an
aldose to a ketose (Section22.1). Because,in solution,the sugars exist predominantly
pH3.5.papapapapapapapapapapapapapapapapapapapaBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1025
1026CHAPTER 24CatalysisOverall ReactionHOHOHHHOHHOHHB2O3POCH22O3POCH2D-glucose-6-phosphate isomeraseD-glucose-6-phosphateD-fructose-6-phosphateHHOOOHOHOHHOH2O3POCH2CH2OH654132HOHHOHOHOHHHBBHB2O3POCH2CH2OHOHHHOHHOOHBBOCHB2O3POCH2HHOHHOHOHOHHHBBOHCHB2O3POCH2HHOHHOOOHHHBHBCH2OHHB2O3POCH2HOHHOOOHHHBBin their cyclic forms,the enzyme must open the six-membered-ring sugar and convert
it to the five-membered-ring sugar. Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase is known to have

at least three catalytic groups at its active site,one functioning as a general acid and

two acting as general bases (Figure24.11). The reaction proceeds as follows:
¥The first step of the reaction is a ring-opening reaction. A general base (presum-
ably a histidine residue) helps remove a proton,and a general acid (thought to be

a lysine residue) aids the departure of the leaving group (Section18.7).
¥In the second step of the reaction,a base (apparently a glutamate residue) removes
a proton from the of the aldehyde. Recall that are relatively

acidic (Section19.1).
¥In the next step,the enol is converted to a ketone (Section19.2).
¥In the final step of the reaction,lysine acts as a general base to catalyze ring closure.
a-hydrogensa-carbonFigure 24.11
Proposed mechanism for the isomerization of D-glucose-6-phosphate to D-fructose-6-diphosphate.BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1026
Section 24.9Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
1027PROBLEM 21When D-glucose undergoes isomerization in the absence of the enzyme,three products re-
sult:D-glucose,D-fructose,and 
D-mannose (Section22.5). Why is 
D-mannose not formed
in the enzyme-catalyzed reaction?PROBLEM 22The descending leg of the pH
Ðrate profile for glucose-6-phosphate isomerase indicates
that one of the amino acid side chains at the active site of the enzyme has a value of

9.3. Identify the amino acid side chain.Mechanism for AldolaseThe substrate for the first enzyme-catalyzed reaction of glycolysis is a six-carbon
compound (D-glucose). The final product of glycolysis is two molecules of a
three-carbon compound (pyruvate). Therefore,at some point in the series of en-

zyme-catalyzed reactions,a six-carbon compound must be cleaved into two three-

carbon compounds. The enzyme 
aldolasecatalyzes this cleavage (Figure24.12).
Aldolase converts 
D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate into D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphateand dihydroxyacetone phosphate. The enzyme is called aldolase because the

reverse reaction is an aldol addition reaction (Section19.13). The reaction pro-

ceeds as follows:
¥In the first step of the aldolase-catalyzed reaction,
D-fructose-1,6-diphos-phate forms an imine,with a lysine residue at the active site of the enzyme 

(Section18.6).
¥A tyrosine residue functions as a general-base catalyst in the step that cleaves the
bond between C-3 and C-4. The molecule of 
D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphateformed in this step dissociates from the enzyme.¥The enamine intermediate rearranges to an imine,with the tyrosine residue now
functioning as a general-acid catalyst.¥Hydrolysis of the imine releases dihydroxyacetone phosphate,the other three-
carbon product.PROBLEM 23Propose a mechanism for the aldolase-catalyzed cleavage of 
D-fructose-1,6-diphos-phate if it did not form an imine with the substrate. What is the advantage gained by

imine formation?PROBLEM 24In glycolysis,why must 
D-glucose-6-phosphate isomerize to D-fructose-6-phosphatebefore the cleavage reaction with aldolase occurs? (See p.1026.)
PROBLEM 25Aldolase shows no activity if it is incubated with iodoacetic acid before 
D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate is added to the reaction mixture. Suggest what could cause the loss of

activity.
pa3-D Molecule:AldolaseBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1027
1028CHAPTER 24CatalysisCH2OPO32ÐCH2OPO32ÐCH2OPO32ÐH2N(CH
2)4LysCH2OPO32ÐCH2OPO32ÐCHOH
OHOHHHOHHOCH2OPO32ÐCH2OHCOHCOHCOaldolaseOverall ReactionCH2OPO32ÐCH2OPO32Ð(CH2)4LysCNHCH2OPO32Ð(CH2)4LysCCHOH
NHCH2OPO32ÐCH2ÐOTyr
CH2ÐOTyr
CH2ÐOTyr
CH2ÐOTyr
CH2OHTyr
OH2OCH2OPO32Ð(CH2)4LysCCH2OHNHCH2OPO32Ð(CH2)4LysCCH2OHH2NHOH
HHOHOH
HOH
HHOHOH
HOH
COD-fructose-1,6-diphosphatedihydroxyacetonephosphateD-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphateFigure 24.12
Proposed mechanism for the aldolase-catalyzed cleavage of D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate.BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1028
Key Terms
1029Key Terms
acid catalyst (p.000)
active site (p.1015)

acyl-enzyme intermediate (p.1020)

base catalyst (p.1006)

catalyst (p.999)

covalent catalysis (p.1001)

effective molarity (p.1010)

electrophilic catalyst (p.1008)

electrostatic catalysis (p.1020)
enzyme (p.1015)
general-acid catalysis (p.1004)

general-base catalysis (p.1006)

induced-fit model (p.1016)

intramolecular catalysis (p.1012)

lock-and-key model (p.1015)

metal-ion catalysis (p.000)

molecular recognition (p.1015)

nucleophilic catalysis (p.1001)
nucleophilic catalyst (p.1001)
pHÐactivity profile (p.1024)
pHÐrate profile (p.1024)
relative rate (p.1010)

site-specific mutagenesis (p.1020)

specific-acid catalysis (p.1004)

specific-base catalysis (p.1006)

substrate (p.1015)
SummaryA catalystincreases the rate of a chemical reaction but is not
consumed or changed in the reaction. A catalyst changes the

rate at which a product is formed,not the amount of product

formed. A catalyst must increase the rate of a slow step. It

does this by providing a pathway with a lower To pro-

vide a lower a catalyst can convert the reactant into a

less stable species,make the transition state more stable,or

completely change the mechanism of the reaction. Some of

the ways a catalyst provides a more favorable pathway for a

reaction is by increasing the susceptibility of an electrophile

to nucleophilic attack,increasing the reactivity of a nucleo-

phile,or increasing the leaving ability of a group.
A nucleophilic catalystincreases the rate of a reactionby acting as a nucleophile:It forms an intermediate by form-

ing a covalent bond with a reactant. Stabilization of a charge

by an opposite charge is called 
electrostatic catalysis
. Anacid catalyst increases the rate of a reaction by donating a

proton to a reactant. There are two types of acid catalysis:In

specific-acid catalysis
,the proton is fully transferred to the
reactant before the slow step of the reaction; in 
general-acidcatalysis,the proton is transferred during the slow step. A
base catalystincreases the rate of a reaction by removing a
proton from the reactant. There are two types of base cataly-

sis:In 
specific-base catalysis
,the proton is completely
removed from the reactant before the slow step of the

reaction; in general-base catalysis,the proton is removed
during the slow step.
A metal ioncan increase the rate of a reaction by making
a reaction center more susceptible to receiving electrons,by

making a leaving group a weaker base,or by increasing the

nucleophilicity of water. An 
electrophilic catalyst
is a metalion with the same catalytic effect as a proton.
The rate of a chemical reaction is determined by thenumber of collisions between two molecules or between
Gà,Gà.two intramolecular constituents with sufficient energy and
with the proper orientation in a given period of time. An

intramolecular reaction
that forms a five-or a six-
membered ring occurs more readily than the analogous

intermolecular reaction
because both the frequency of the
collisions and the probability that collisions will occur in
the proper orientation increases. Effective molarity
is theconcentration of the reactant that would be required in an

intermolecular reaction for it to have the same rate as the

corresponding intramolecular reaction. When a catalyst is

part of the reacting molecule,the catalysis is called

intramolecular catalysis; intramolecular nucleophiliccatalysis,intramolecular general-acid or general-base catal-

ysis,and intramolecular metal-ion catalysis all are possible.
Essentially all organic reactions that occur in biological
systems require a catalyst. Most biological catalysts are

enzymes. The reactant of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is
called a substrate. The substrate specifically binds to the
active site
of the enzyme,and all the bond-making and
bond-breaking steps of the reaction occur while it is at that
site. The specificity of an enzyme for its substrate is an ex-

ample of molecular recognition
. The change in conforma-
tion of the enzyme when it binds the substrate is known as

induced fit
.Two important factors contributing to the remarkable cat-
alytic ability of enzymes are that reacting groups are brought

together at the active site in the proper orientation for reac-

tion and that the amino acid side chains and a metal ion in

the case of some enzymes are in the proper position relative

to the substrate needed for catalysis. Information about the

relationship between the structure of a protein and its func-

tion has been determined by site-specific mutagenesis
. ApHÐrate profile
is a plot of the activity of an enzyme as a
function of the pH of the reaction mixture.AU:Circled terms are not 
boldfacein text.Delete here?
Make 
boldfacein text?
AU:Insert terms? (
Boldfacein text)
Or make lightface in text?
anchimeric assistance (p.1012)
metal ion (p.1007)
gem
-dialkyl effect (p.1012)
BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1029
1030CHAPTER 24CatalysisProblems
26.Which of the following two compounds would eliminate HBr more rapidly in basic solutions?
27.Which compound would form a lactone more rapidly?
a.b.
28.Which compound would form an anhydride more rapidly?
29.Which compound has the greatest rate of hydrolysis:benzamide,
o-carboxybenzamide,o-formylbenzamide,or
o-hydroxybenzamide?30.Indicate the type of catalysis that is occurring in the slow step in each of the following reaction sequences:
a.b.31.The deuterium kinetic isotope effect for the hydrolysis of aspirin is 2.2. What does this tell you about the kind of
catalysis exerted by the 
ortho-carboxyl substituent? (Hint:It is easier to break an bond than an bond.)
32.Draw the pH
Ðactivity profile for an enzyme with one catalytic group at the active site. The catalytic group is a general-acid catalyst
with a of 5.6.
33.A complex catalyzes the following hydrolysis of the lactam shown:
Propose a mechanism for the metal-ion catalyzed reaction.Co2OH2OCH2NNHR2NCH2NOCH2OCCH2CH2NCH2NH2R2NCH2NCo2paODOHH2OD2OslowCCOHHO
OOHHOOH
OOHCOHOHOCH3CH2SCH2CH2ClCH
3CH2SCH2CH2OHCH2CH2CH2CH3SClslowHOCH2CHHOBrorOCH2COOCHHOBrOCOOorCOOHCOOHOHOHCH3HHorOHOHCOOHCOOHH3CHCH2BrOHorCH2BrHOBRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1030
Problems103134.There are two kinds of aldolases. Class I aldolases are found in animals and plants; Class II aldolases are found in fungi,a
lgae,and
some bacteria. Only Class I aldolases form an imine. Class II aldolases have a metal ion at the active site. The mechanism

for catalysis by Class I aldolases was given in Section24.9. Propose a mechanism for catalysis by Class II aldolases.
35.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction. (
Hint:The rate of the reaction is much slower if the nitrogen atom is replaced
by CH.)36.The hydrolysis of the ester shown here is catalyzed by morpholine,a secondary amine. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
(Hint:The of the conjugate acid of morpholine is 9.3,so morpholine is too weak a base to function as a general-base catalyst
in this reaction.)37.The enzyme carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the conversion of carbon dioxide into bicarbonate ion (Section1.20). It is a
metalloenzyme,with coordinated at the active site by three histidine residues. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
38.At the rate of hydrolysis of ester A is greater than the rate of hydrolysis of ester B. At the relative rates reverse.
(Ester B hydrolyzes faster than ester A.) Explain these observations.
39.2-Acetoxycyclohexyl tosylate reacts with acetate ion to form 1,2-cyclohexanediol diacetate. The reaction is stereospecific; 
thestereoisomers obtained as products depend on the stereoisomer used as a reactant. Explain the following observations:

a.Both cis reactants form an optically active trans product,but each cis reactant forms a different trans product.

b.Both trans reactants form the same racemic mixture.

c.A trans reactant is more reactive than a cis reactant.
40.Staphylococcusnuclease is an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of DNA. The overall hydrolysis reaction is as follows:
Recall that the nucleotides in DNA have phosphodiester linkages. The reaction is catalyzed by Glu43,and Arg87. Propose a
mechanism for this reaction.Ca2,H2OROOR
POOROROH
OHPOOCH3CO2-acetoxycyclohexyl tosylateOOOTs
COCH31,2-cyclohexanediol diacetateOOCOCH3COCH3CH3CH3ABOCOCH2CH2NCH3CH3CH3OCOCH2CH2NpH8,pH12,CO2H2OHCO3 Hcarbonic anhydraseZn2H2OONHCH3OHCHCOCH3OOCHCOOOmorpholinepaNCH3HOH2ONCH3OHClClOHZn2BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1031
1032CHAPTER 24Catalysis41.Proof that an imine was formed between aldolase and its substrate was obtained by using 
D-fructose-1,6-diphosphate,labeled at the
C-2 position with as the substrate. was added to the reaction mixture. A radioactive product was isolated from the

reaction mixture and hydrolyzed in an acidic solution. Draw the structure of the radioactive product obtained from the acidic

solution. (Hint:reduces an imine linkage.)42.3-Amino-2-oxindole catalyzes the decarboxylation of -keto acids.
a.Propose a mechanism for the catalyzed reaction.

b.Would 3-aminoindole be equally effective as a catalyst?
43.a.Explain why the alkyl halide shown here reacts much more rapidly than do primary alkyl halides,such as butyl chloride and
pentyl chloride,with guanine residues.
b.The alkyl halide can react with two guanine residues in two different chains,thereby cross-linking the chains. Propose a
mechanism for the cross-linking reaction.44.Triosephosphate isomerase catalyzes the conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The enzyme
Õscatalytic groups are Glu165 and His95. In the first step of the reaction,these catalytic groups function as a general-base and 
ageneral-acid catalyst,respectively. Propose a mechanism for the reaction.
2O3POCH2CCH2OHtriosephosphate isomeraseO2O3POCH2CHCHOOHglyceraldehyde-3-phosphatedihydroxyacetone phosphateClClH2NNRNNOClCH2CH2NCH2CH2Cl2 HN
CH3CH2CH2NCH2CH2CH3H2NNH2NRNNNOONRNHNNH
NH2NHO3-amino-2-oxindoleaNaBH4NaBH414C,BRUI24-999_1032r2  29-03-2003  1:38 PM  Page 1032
25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥
Metabolism1033N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate
Casimir Funk (1884Ð1967)wasborn in Poland,received his medical

degree from the University of Bern,

and became a U.S. citizen in 1920. 

In 1923,he returned to Poland to

direct the State Institute of Hygiene.

He returned to the United States

permanently when World War II

broke out.
Manyenzymes cannot catalyze a reaction with-
out the help of a cofactor. 
Cofactorsassistenzymes in catalyzing a variety of reactions
that cannot be catalyzed solely by the amino acid side chains

of the protein. Some cofactors are 
metal ions,while others are
organic molecules
.A metal-ion cofactor acts as a Lewis acid in a variety of ways
to help an enzyme catalyze a reaction. It can coordinate with

groups on the enzyme,causing them to align in a geometry advan-

tageous for reaction; it can help bind the substrate to the active site of the enzyme; it can

form a coordination complex with the substrate to increase its reactivity; or it can in-

crease the nucleophilicity of water at the active site (Section24.5). An enzyme that has

a tightly bound metal ion (,) is called a

metalloenzyme. Carboxypeptidase A is an example of a metalloenzyme (Section24.9).
PROBLEM 1How does the metal ion in carboxypeptidase A increase its catalytic activity?
Cofactorsthat are organic molecules are called 
coenzymes. Coenzymes are derived
from organic compounds commonly known as 
vitamins. Table25.1lists the vitamins
and their biochemically active coenzyme forms.
A vitaminis a substance the body cannot synthesize that is needed in small
amounts for normal body function. Sir Frederick Hopkins was the first to suggest that

diseases such as rickets and scurvy might result from the absence of substances in the

diet that are needed only in very small quantities. Because the first such compound

recognized to be essential in the diet was an amine,Casimir Funk incorrectly conclud-

ed that all such compounds were amines and called them vitamines (Òlife-aminesÓ).

The ewas later dropped from the name.
We have seen that enzymes catalyze reactions following the principles of organic
chemistry (Section24.9). Coenzymes use these same principles. We will see that
Zn2Mo2,Fe2,Cu2,Cu2Cu2,Co2,BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1033
1034CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolismcoenzymes play a variety of chemical roles that the amino acid side chains of enzymes
cannot play. Somecoenzymes function as oxidizing and reducing agents,some allow

electrons to be delocalized,some activate groups for further reaction,and some pro-

vide good nucleophiles or strong bases needed for a reaction. Because it would be

highly inefficient for the body to use a compound only once and then discard it,coen-

zymes are recycled. Therefore,we will see that any coenzyme that is changed during

the course of a reaction is subsequently converted back to its original form.
An enzyme plus the cofactor it requires to catalyze a reaction is called a
holoenzyme. An enzyme that has had its cofactor removed is called an 
apoenzyme.Holoenzymes are catalytically active,whereas apoenzymes are catalytically inactive

because they have lost their cofactors.
Early nutritional studies divided vitamins into two classes:water-soluble vita-
mins and water-insoluble vitamins (Table25.1). Vitamins A,D,E,and K are water

insoluble. Vitamin K is the only water-insoluble vitamin currently known to func-

tion as a coenzyme. Vitamin A is required for proper vision,vitamin D regulates cal-

cium and phosphate metabolism,and vitamin E is an antioxidant. Because they do

not function as coenzymes,vitamins A,D,and E are not discussed in this chapter.

Vitamins A and E are discussed in Sections9.8and 26.7,and vitamin D is discussed

in Section29.6.
Table 25.1The Vitamins, Their Coenzymes, and Their Chemical Functions
ReactionHuman
VitaminCoenzymecatalyzeddeficiency disease
Water-Soluble Vitamins
Niacin (niacinate)OxidationPellagra
NADH,NADPHReduction
Riboflavin (vitamin )FAD,FMNOxidationSkin inflammation
ReductionThiamine (vitamin )Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP)Two-carbon transferBeriberi

Lipoic acid (lipoate)LipoateOxidation
ÑDihydrolipoateReduction
Pantothenic acid (pantothenate)Coenzyme A (CoASH)Acyl transfer
ÑBiotin (vitamin H)BiotinCarboxylation
ÑPyridoxine (vitamin )Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)DecarboxylationAnemia
Transamination

Racemizationbond cleavage
Vitamin Coenzyme IsomerizationPernicious anemia
Folic acid (folate)Tetrahydrofolate (THF)One-carbon transferMegaloblastic anemia

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)ÑÑScurvyWater-Insoluble (lipid-soluble) Vitamins
Vitamin A
ÑÑÑ
Vitamin D
ÑÑRickets
Vitamin E
ÑÑÑ
Vitamin KVitamin Carboxylation
ÑKH2B12B12b-Substitutiona,b-EliminationCaCbB6B1FADH2, FMNH2B2NAD, NADPBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1034
Section 25.1Overall View of Metabolism
1035Sir Frederick G. Hopkins
(1861Ð1947)was born in England.His finding that one sample of a

protein supported life while another

did not led him to conclude that the
former contained a trace amount of a

substance essential to life. His

hypothesis later became known as the
Òvitamin concept,Ófor which he

received a share of the 1929 Nobel

Prize in physiology or medicine. He

also originated the concept of
essential amino acids.VITAMIN 
Christiaan Eijkman (1858Ð1930) was a member
of a medical team that was sent to the East Indies
to study beriberi in 1886. At that time,all diseases were thought

to be caused by microorganisms. When the microorganism that

caused beriberi could not be found,the team left the East In-

dies. Eijkman stayed behind to become the director of a new

bacteriological laboratory. In 1896,he accidentally discovered

the cause of beriberi when he noticed that chickens used in the

laboratory had developed symptoms characteristic of the dis-

ease. He found that the symptoms had developed when a cook

had started feeding the chickens rice meant for hospital pa-

tients. The symptoms disappeared when a new cook resumed

feeding chicken feed to the chickens. Later it was recognized

that thiamine (vitamin ) is present in rice hulls but not in

polished rice. For this work,Eijkman shared the 1929 Nobel

Prize in physiology or medicine with Frederick Hopkins.B1B1Christiaan EijkmanSir Frederick HopkinsAll the water-soluble vitamins except vitamin C function as coenzymes. In spite of
its name,vitamin C is not actually a vitamin because it is required in fairly high

amounts and most mammals are able to synthesize it (Section22.19). Humans and

guinea pigs cannot synthesize it,however,so it must be included in their diets. We

have seen that vitamin C and vitamin E are radical inhibitors and therefore are antiox-

idants. Vitamin C traps radicals formed in aqueous environments,whereas vitamin E

traps radicals formed in nonpolar environments (Section9.8).
It is impossible to overdose on water-soluble vitamins because the body can readily
eliminate any excess. You can,however,overdose on water-insoluble vitamins be-

cause they are 
noteasily eliminated by the body and can accumulate in cell mem-branes and other nonpolar components of the body. For example,excess vitamin D

causes calcification of soft tissues. The kidneys are particularly susceptible to calci-

fication,which eventually leads to kidney failure. Vitamin D is formed in the skin as

a result of a photochemical reaction caused by the ultraviolet rays from the sun

(Section29.6).
25.1Overall View of Metabolism
The reactions that living organisms carry out to obtain the energy they need and to
synthesize the compounds they require are collectively known as 
metabolism. Theprocess of metabolism can be divided into two parts:
catabolismand anabolism.Catabolic reactions
break down complex nutrient molecules to provide energy and
simple precursor molecules for synthesis. Anabolic reactions
require energy and result
in the synthesis of complex biomolecules from simpler precursor molecules.
catabolism:
anabolism:It is important to remember that almost every reaction that occurs in a living system
is catalyzed by an enzyme. The enzyme holds the reactants and any necessary cofac-

tors in place,so that the reacting functional groups and catalytic groups are oriented in

a way that will cause a specific well-defined chemical reaction (Section24.8). In some

cases,it may be helpful to see where a particular enzyme-catalyzed reaction discussed

in this chapter fits into the overall metabolic scheme,so we will start by taking an

overall view of metabolism.
complex moleculesenergysimple moleculesenergycomplex moleculessimple moleculesBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1035
1036CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismCO2CO2NADHStage 1fatsfatty acidsStage 3Stage 4Stage 23 ATP          NAD
carbohydratesmonosaccharidespyruvateacetyl-CoAcitric acidcycleproteinsamino acidsFigure 25.1
The four stages of catabolism:1.digestion (hydrolysis of polymers

to monomers)
2.conversion of monomers to

compounds that can enter the citric
acid cycle
3.the citric acid cycle

4.oxidative phosphorylation
Catabolism can be divided into four stages. The 
first stage of catabolism
is calleddigestion. The reactants required for all life processes ultimately come from our diet.

In that sense,we really are what we eat. In this first stage,fats,carbohydrates,and pro-

teins are hydrolyzed into fatty acids,monosaccharides,and amino acids,respectively

(Figure25.1).
In the second stage of catabolism
,these hydrolysis products
Ñfatty acids,mono-
saccharides,and amino acids
Ñare converted to compounds that can enter the citric
acid cycle. To enter the citric acid cycle,a compound must be either one of the com-

pounds in the cycle itself (called a citric acid cycle intermediate),acetyl-CoA,or

pyruvate. Acetyl CoA is the only non
Ðcitric acid cycle intermediate that can enter
the cycle (Section17.20); pyruvate can enter the citric acid cycle only because it can

be converted to acetyl-CoA or to oxaloacetate,a citric acid cycle intermediate

(Sections25.4and 25.5). Fatty acids are converted to acetyl-CoA,monosaccharides

are converted to pyruvate via glycolysis (Figure25.2),and amino acids are convert-

ed to acetyl-CoA,pyruvate,and/or citric acid cycle intermediates,depending on the

amino acid.The third stage of catabolism
is the citric acid cycle (also known as the Krebs
cycle or the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle; Figure25.3). For every acetyl-CoA that

enters the cycle,two molecules of are formed.
Metabolic energy is measured in terms of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). How the
body uses ATP is described in Sections27.2and 27.3. Very little ATP is formed in the

first three stages of catabolism. However,in the 
fourth stage of catabolism
,every
NADH (see Section25.2) that is formed in the process of carrying out oxidation reac-

tions in the earlier stages is converted into three ATPs in a process known as 
oxidativephosphorylation. Thus,the bulk of the energy provided by fats,carbohydrates,and
proteins is obtained in this fourth stage.CO2BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1036
Section 25.1Overall View of Metabolism
1037Figure 25.2
GlycolysisÑthe series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions responsible for the conversion of 1 mole of D-glucose into 2 moles of pyruvate.CH2OHCH2OPiCH2OHOHHOOH
OHOOCOOHOHHOCH2OHPiOCH2     Mg2hexokinaseATPD-glucoseCH2OPiOHHOOH
OHOD-glucose-6-PdihydroxyacetoneD-glyceraldehyde-3-Ptriosephosphate     isomeraseD-fructose-6-POOHOHHOCH2OPiPiOCH2CH2OPiPi     1,3-diphosphoglycerateO3-phosphoglycerate2-phosphoglycerateCH2OPi2-phosphoenolpyruvateCCOOPiOCH2lactateCCOHOH
OCH3pyruvateCCOOOCH3D-fructose-1.6-diPADP         Mg2pyruvate kinaseADPATP
glyceraldehyde-3-P   dehydrogenaseNADH HNAD, HPO32Mg2phosphofructokinasealdolaseATPADPADPATP       lactatedehydrogenaseNADNADH  H         Mg2 or Mn2phosphoglucoisomerasephosphoglycerate     kinase, Mg2phosphoglyceromutase,                Mg2Mg2 or Mn2,      enolaseOOPOHCO
HOH
COHOH
OPiCH2OPiCOHOH
OCH2OHCOHOP
iAnabolismcan be thought of as the reverse of catabolism. In anabolism,acetyl-CoA,
pyruvate,and citric acid cycle intermediates are the starting materials for the synthesis

of fatty acids,monosaccharides,and amino acids. These compounds are then used to

form fats,carbohydrates,and proteins. The mechanisms utilized by biological systems

to synthesize fats and proteins are discussed in Sections19.21and 27.13.
AU:ShouldnÕt this be 1,6-diP?
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1037
1038CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismFigure 25.3
The citric acid cycle (also known as the Krebs cycle or the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle)
Ñthe series ofenzyme-catalyzed reactions responsible for the oxidation of pyruvate and acetyl-CoA to and for

the entry of pyruvate and acetyl-CoA into the cycle.1pyruvate dehydrogenase5-ketogutarate dehydrogenase8fumarase2citrate synthase6succinyl-CoA synthetase9malate dehydrogenase3aconitase7succinate dehydrogenase10pyruvate carboxylase4isocitrate dehydrogenaseaCO2pyruvate109citrateCoASHH2Omalate231CH3CCOOOacetyl-CoACH2CH3CSCoACCOOCOOCH2HCOHCOOCOOOCH2HOCCOOCH2COOCOOisocitratesuccinyl-CoAsuccinatefumarate45-ketoglutarateCHOHCHCOOCH2COOCOOCOCH2CH2COOCOOCOCH2CH2COOCOOCH2CH2COOSCoAONAD    CoASHNAD    CoASH
NADNADH    H     NADH    H   NADH    HNADHCO3  
ATPADP  Pi678GTP  CoASHFADFADH2H2OGDP  HPO32HHCCCOOOOCNADH    H     CO
2CO2CO2oxaloacetateBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1038
Section 25.2Niacin: The Vitamin Needed for Many Redox Reactions
1039and are oxidizing agents.
NADPNAD25.2Niacin: The Vitamin Needed for Many 
Redox ReactionsAn enzyme that catalyzes an oxidation reaction or a reduction reaction requires a
coenzyme because none of the amino acid side chains can act as oxidizing or reducing

agents. The coenzyme is the oxidizing or reducing agent. The enzyme
Õs role is to hold
the substrate and coenzyme together so that the oxidation or reduction reaction can

take place.
The coenzymes most commonly used by enzymes to catalyze oxidation reactions arenicotinamide adenine dinucleotide and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotidephosphate . (You were introduced to in Section20.11.)
When (or ) oxidizes a substrate,the coenzyme is reduced to NADH
(or NADPH). NADH and NADPH are reducing agents; they are used as coenzymes by

enzymes that catalyze reduction reactions. Enzymes that catalyze oxidation reactions

bind (or ) more tightly than they bind NADH (or NADPH). When the

oxidation reaction is over,the relatively loosely bound NADH (or NADPH) dissoci-

ates from the enzyme. Likewise,enzymes that catalyze reduction reactions bind

NADH (or NADPH) more tightly than they bind (or ). When the re-

duction reaction is over,the relatively loosely bound (or ) dissociates

from the enzyme.is composed of two nucleotides linked together through their phosphate
groups. A nucleotideconsists of a heterocycle attached,in a to C-1 of
a phosphorylated ribose (Section27.1). A 
heterocycle
is a cyclic compound in which
one or more of the ring atoms is an atom other than carbon (p. 872).b-configuration,NADsubstratereducedNADenzymesubstrateoxidizedNADHHsubstratereducedNADPenzymesubstrateoxidizedNADPHHNADPNADNADPNADNADPNADNADPNADONCNH2HPONAD  X  H     NADP  X  PO32adeninepyridinenicotinamideNADH  X  H     NADPH  X  PO32OHOOHOONNNNNH2POOHOOXOONCNH2HHOOPOOHOOHOONNNNNH2POOHOOXOOONAD(NADP)(NAD)NADH and NADPH are reducing agents.
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1039
1040CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismTheheterocyclic component of one of the nucleotides of is nicotinamide,and
the heterocyclic component of the other is adenine. This accounts for the coenzyme
Õsname (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). The positive charge in the abbrevi-
ation indicates the positively charged nitrogen of the substituted pyridine ring.
The only way in which differs structurally from is in the phosphate
group bonded to the group of the ribose of the adenine nucleotide; this

explains the addition of 
ÒPÓto the name. and NADH are generally used as
coenzymes in catabolic reactions; and NADPH are generally used as coen-

zymes in anabolic reactions.The adenine nucleotide for the coenzymes is provided by ATP. The nicotinamide
nucleotide is not synthesized by biological systems but is derived instead from the

vitamin known as niacin.
OHHOOOOOOOO
OPPPOOO
NNNNNH2adenosine triphosphateATPNADPNAD2-OHNADNADPNADNADNHNNNOOOOHOOH
NH2NOOPheterocycleCNH2NOCOHa nucleotideadenineniacinamide
nicotinamideniacinnicotinic acid3-D Molecules:Niacin;
Nicotinamide;
Reduced form of nicotinamideNIACIN DEFICIENCYA deficiency in niacin causes pellagra,a disease
that begins with dermatitis and ultimately causes
insanity and death. More than 120,000 cases of pellagra were

reported in the United States in 1927,mainly among poor peo-

ple with unvaried diets. A factor known to be present in prepa-

rations of vitamin B prevented pellagra,but it was not until

1937 that the factor was identified as nicotinic acid.
When bread companies started adding nicotinic acid to theirbread,they insisted that its name be changed to niacin because

they thought that nicotinic acid sounded too much like nicotine

and they did not want their vitamin-enriched bread to be associ-

ated with a harmful substance. Niacinamide is a nutritionally

equivalent form of the vitamin.
The oxidation of the secondary alcohol group
of malate to a ketone group
is one of the
reactions in the citric acid cycle (Figure25.2). is the oxidizing reagent in this

reaction. Many enzymes that catalyze oxidation reactions are called 
dehydrogenases
.Recall that the number of bonds decreases in an oxidation reaction (Section20.0).

In other words,dehydrogenases remove hydrogen.
-semialdehyde is reduced to homoserine in an anabolic pathway,with
NADPH as the reducing agent.
b-AspartateOOHOmalateOCCH2CHCONADOOOoxaloacetateOCCH2CCONADHHmalatedehydrogenaseCHNADBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1040
Section 25.2Niacin: The Vitamin Needed for Many Redox Reactions
1041The differentiation between the coenzymes used in catabolism and anabolism is
maintained because the enzymes that catalyze these oxidationÐreduction reactionsexhibit strong specificity for a particular coenzyme. For example,an enzyme that

catalyzes an oxidation reaction can readily tell the difference between and
if the enzyme is in a catabolic pathway,it will bind but not 
In addition,the relative concentrations of the coenzymes in the cell encourage binding

of the appropriate coenzyme. For example,because and NADH are catabolic

coenzymes and catabolic reactions are most often oxidation reactions,the 

concentration in the cell is much greater than the NADH concentration. (The cell

maintains its ratio near 1000.) Because and NADPH are

anabolic coenzymes and anabolic pathways are predominantly reduction reactions,the

concentration of NADPH in the cell is greater than the concentration of 

(Theratio of is maintained at about 0.01.)
Mechanisms for Pyridine Nucleotide CoenzymesHow do these oxidation
Ðreduction reactions take place? All the chemistry of the
pyridine nucleotide coenzymes (NADH,and NADPH) takes place at

the 4-position of the pyridine ring. The rest of the molecule is important for binding the

coenzyme to the proper site on the enzyme. If a substrate is being 
oxidized,it donates a
hydride ion to the 4-position of the pyridine ring. In the following reaction,the

primary alcohol is oxidized to an aldehyde. A basic amino acid side chain of the en-

zyme can help the reaction by removing a proton from the oxygen in the substrate.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is an example of an enzyme that uses
as an oxidizing coenzyme. The enzyme catalyzes the oxidation of the aldehyde
group of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) to an anhydride of a carboxylic acid and

phosphoric acid. This is a reaction that occurs in glycolysis (Figure25.3).
In the first step of the mechanism for this reaction,an SH group of a cysteine side
chain at the active site of the enzyme reacts with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to form a

tetrahedral intermediate. A side chain of the enzyme increases cysteine
Õs nucleophilici-ty by acting as a general-base catalyst. The tetrahedral intermediate expels a hydride

ion,transferring it to the 4-position of the pyridine ring of an that is bonded to

the enzyme at an adjacent site. NADH dissociates from the enzyme,and the enzyme

binds a new Phosphate reacts with the thioester,forming the anhydride product
NAD.NADNADONoxidation of substratereduction of coenzymeCNH2OOHB
NCNH2RRHHHCOHB
ÐHH432651C(H)NAD, NADP,[NADP][NADPH]NADP.NADP[NAD][NADH]NADNADNADP.NAD,NADP;NADOO  -aspartate-semialdehydeHCCH2CHCONADPHHOhomoserineHOCH2CH2CHCONADPNH3homoserinedehydrogenaseNH3D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphateCHCH2OPO32OOHNAD
NADHH
HD-1,3-diphosphoglycerateCOPO
32CH2OPO32OOHHOOHOOPglyceraldehyde-3-phosphatedehydrogenaseTutorial:
Mechanisms of - and

NADH-dependent reactionsNADBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1041
1042CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolismand releasing cysteine. Notice that at the end of the reaction the holoenzyme is exactly
as it was at the beginning,so the catalytic cycle can be repeated. The NADH produced

in the reaction is reoxidized to in the fourth stage of catabolism (Figure25.1).
The mechanism for reduction by NADH (or by NADPH) is the reverse of the mech-
anism for oxidation by (or by ). If a substrate is being 
reduced
,the di-
hydropyridine ring donates a hydride ion from its 4-position to the substrate. An acidic

side chain of the enzyme aids the reaction by donating a proton to the substrate.Because NADH and NADPH reduce compounds by donating a hydride ion,they can
be considered biological equivalents of or 
Ñhydride donors used as
reducing reagents in nonbiological reactions (Section20.1).
Why are the structures of biological redox (reducing and oxidizing) reagents so
much more complicated than the structures of the redox reagents used to carry out the
same reactions in the laboratory? NADH is certainly more complicated than 

although both reagents reduce compounds by donating a hydride ion. Much of the

structural complexity of a coenzyme is for molecular recognition
Ñto allow it to be
LiAlH4,LiAlH4NaBH4ONreduction of substrateoxidation of coenzymeCNH2ROHB
ÐHH432651COOHB
NCNH2RHHHCNADPNADNADSHBNADSHNADSHBNADSHBNADSHBNADNADHSHBNADGAPCORHCROOHCCOOHOORRCOORPOOOOPNAD+SHBCORenzymeBOOOOPNADproductsubstrateBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1042
Section 25.2Niacin: The Vitamin Needed for Many Redox Reactions
1043recognized by the enzyme. Molecular recognition
allows the enzyme to bind the
substrate and the coenzyme in the proper orientation for reaction.In addition,a redox reagent found in a biological system must be less reactive than a
laboratory redox reagent because it must be selective. For example,a biological reduc-

ing agent cannot reduce just any reducible compound with which it comes into contact.

Biological reactions are much more carefully controlled than that. Because the coen-

zymes are relatively unreactive compared with nonbiological redox agents,the reaction

between the substrate and the coenzyme does not occur at all or takes place very slowly

without the enzyme. For example,NADH will reduce an aldehyde or a ketone only in

the presence of an enzyme. and are more reactive hydride donors
Ñmuch too reactive to exist in the aqueous environment of the cell. Similarly,is a

much more selective oxidizing agent than the typical oxidizing agents used in the labo-

ratory; for example,will oxidize an alcohol only in the presence of an enzyme.
Because a biological reducing agent must be recycled (rather than having its oxi-
dized form thrown away as would be the case for a reducing agent used in a laboratory),

the equilibrium constant between the oxidized and reduced forms is generally close to

unity. Therefore,biological redox reactions are not highly exergonic; rather,they are

equilibrium reactions that are driven in the appropriate direction by the removal of

reaction products as a result of participation in subsequent reactions.As you study the coenzymes in this chapter,don
Õt let the complexity of their struc-
tures deter you. Notice that only a small part of the coenzyme is actually involved in

the chemical reaction. Notice also that the coenzymes follow the same rules of organ-

ic chemistry as do the simple organic molecules with which you are familiar.
We saw in Section5.16that an oxidizing enzyme can distinguish between the two
hydrogens on the carbon from which it catalyzes the removal of a hydride ion. For

example,alcohol dehydrogenase removes only the pro-
Rhydrogen,of ethanol.
(is the pro-
Shydrogen.)Similarly,a reducing enzyme can distinguish between the two hydrogens at the
4-position of the nicotinamide ring of NADH. An enzyme has a specific binding site for

the coenzyme,and when it binds the coenzyme,it blocks one of its sides. If the enzyme

blocks the B-side of NADH,the substrate will bind to the A-side and the hydride ion

will be transferred to the substrate. If the enzyme blocks the A-side of the coenzyme,the

substrate will have to bind to the B-side and the hydride ion will be transferred. Cur-

rently,156 dehydrogenases are known to transfer and 121 are known to transfer 
Hb.Ha,HbHaCH3OHNADalcoholdehydrogenaseHbHaCH3CONADHaHHbethanolacetaldehydeHbHa,NADNADLiAlH4NaBH4NRCOHbHaHsubstrateA-sideB-sideNRCCH2NOOHbHaHThe enzyme blocks the B-side of the coenzyme,so the substrate binds to the A-side.The enzyme blocks the A-side of the coenzyme,so the substrate binds to the B-side.enzymeCH2NOBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1043
1044CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolism25.3Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide and Flavin Mononucleotide: Vitamin 
A flavoprotein
is an enzyme that contains either 
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
or flavin mononucleotide (FMN)
as a coenzyme. FAD and FMN,like and
are coenzymes used in oxidation reactions. As its name indicates,FAD is a
dinucleotide in which one of the heterocyclic components is flavin and the other is

adenine. FMN contains flavin but not adenine
Ñit is a mononucleotide. (Flavin is a
bright yellow compound; 
flavusis Latin for 
Òyellow.
Ó) Notice that instead of ribose,the flavin nucleotide has a ribitol group (a reduced ribose). Flavin plus ribitol is called

riboflavin. Riboflavin is also known as vitamin A vitamin deficiency causes
inflammation of the skin.Inmost flavoproteins,FAD (or FMN) is bound quite tightly. Tight binding allows
the enzyme to control the oxidation potential of the coenzyme. (The more positive the

oxidation potential,the stronger is the oxidizing agent.) Consequently,some flavopro-

teins are stronger oxidizing agents than others.PROBLEM 2FAD is obtained by an enzyme-catalyzed reaction that uses FMN and ATP as substrates.
What is the other product of this reaction?How can we tell which enzymes use FAD (or FMN) rather than (or )
as the oxidizing coenzyme? A rough guideline is that and are the coen-

zymes used in enzyme-catalyzed oxidation reactions involving carbonyl compounds

(alcohols being oxidized to ketones,aldehydes,or carboxylic acids),while FAD and

FMN are the coenzymes used in other types of oxidations. For example,in the following

reactions,FAD oxidizes a dithiol to a disulfide,an amine to an imine,and a saturated

alkyl group to an unsaturated alkene,and FMN oxidizes NADH to (This is only

an approximate guideline,however,because FAD is involved in some oxidations that

involve carbonyl compounds,and and are involved in some oxidations

that do not involve carbonyl compounds.)
NADPNADNAD.NADPNADNADPNADFMNCH2OONHNNNHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2H3CH3COOOPOB2B2.NADP,NADB23-D Molecules:Flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD);

Flavin mononucleotide (FMN)FADCH2OONHNNNHOH
HOH

HOH
CH2H3CH3C1109876544a32adenineriboflavinflavinribitolNNNNNH2HOOHOOOOPOOOPOBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1044
Section 25.3Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide and Flavin Mononucleotide: Vitamin 
1045B2FAD and FMN are oxidizing agents.
Mechanisms for Flavin Nucleotide CoenzymesWhen FAD (or FMN) oxidizes a substrate (S),the coenzyme is reduced to (or
). and like NADH and NADPH,are reducing agents. All the
oxidationÐreduction chemistry takes place on the flavin ring. Reduction of the flavin
ring disrupts the conjugated system,so the reduced coenzymes are less colored than

their oxidized forms.PROBLEM 3How many conjugated double bonds are there in
a.FAD?b.?
In the first step of the mechanism for the FAD-catalyzed oxidation of dihy-
drolipoate to lipoate,the thiolate ion attacks the C-4a position of the flavin ring.

This reaction is general-acid catalyzedÑas the thiolate ion attacks the ring,a pro-
ton is donated to the N-5 nitrogen. A second nucleophilic attack by a thiolate ion,

this time on the sulfur that is covalently attached to the coenzyme,generates the ox-

idized product and Section25.4discusses where this FAD-catalyzed reac-

tion fits into metabolism.
FADH2.FADH2 FADFMNOONHSredNNNRH3CH3CFADH2FMNH2OONHSoxNRH3CH3CHNHNFMNH2,FADH2FMNH2FADH2OsuccinateFADOCCH2CH2COfumarateFADH2succinatedehydrogenaseNADFMNHNADHFMNH2NADH dehydrogenaseCCOOCH
HCOOOOdihydrolipoateD-amino acid orL-amino acidCH2CH2CH2CH2COOCH2CH2CH2CH2COFADlipoateFADH2dihydrolipoyldehydrogenaseSSSHSHONHRCCOONH2RCHCOFADFADH2D-amino acid oxidase orL-amino acid oxidaseand are reducing agents.
FMNH2FADH2BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1045
1046CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismIn the first step of the flavin-catalyzed oxidation of an amino acid to an imino acid,
a basic side chain at the active site of the enzyme removes a proton from the 

of the amino acid. The carbanion that is formed attacks the N-5 position of the flavin

ring. Collapse of the resulting tetrahedral intermediate gives the oxidized amino acid

(an imino acid) and the reduced coenzyme Notice that FAD is a more versatile coenzyme than Unlike which
always uses the same mechanism,flavin coenzymes can use several different mech-

anisms to carry out an oxidation. For example,we have just seen that when 

FAD oxidizes dihydrolipoate,nucleophilic attack occurs on the C-4a position of 

the flavin ring,but when it oxidizes an amino acid,nucleophilic attack occurs on

the N-5 position.Cells contain very low concentrations of FAD and much higher concentrations of
This difference in concentration is responsible for a significant difference in
the enzymes (E) that use as an oxidizing agent and those that use FAD.
Generally,FAD is covalently bound to its enzyme and remains bound after being re-

duced to Unlike NADH,does not dissociate from the enzyme. It,

therefore,must be reoxidized to FAD before the enzyme can enter another round of

catalysis. The oxidizing agent used for this reaction is or Therefore,an
O2.NADFADH2FADH2.NADNAD.NAD,NAD.(FADH2).a-carbonOHBBBSSHONHNNNRH3CH3COONHNNNHRH3CH3COONHHNNNHRH3CH3CHBSRSSSRHRmechanism for dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenasedihydrolipoatelipoateBHRHNHH3CNNBHBHHBNH3COORNHH3CNNB HNH3CNH2OOB B B NH2RNHH3CNNHHNH3COOCCOO
RCCOO
RCCOO
RCCOO
RNH2mechanism for D- or L-amino acid oxidaseNH2NHCCOO
RHBan amino acidan imino acidBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1046
enzyme that uses an oxidizing coenzyme other than may still require to
reoxidize the reduced coenzyme. For this reason,has been called the 
Òcommoncurrency
Óof biological oxidationÐreduction reactions.PROBLEM 4Propose a mechanism for the reduction of lipoate by PROBLEM 5SOLVED
A common way for FAD to become covalently bound to its enzyme is by having a proton
removed from the C-8 methyl group and a proton donated to N-1. Then a cysteine or other

nucleophilic side chain of the enzyme attacks the methylene carbon at C-8 as a proton is

donated to N-5. Describe these events mechanistically.
SOLUTIONNotice that during the process of attaching FAD to the enzyme,FAD is reduced to
It is subsequently oxidized back to FAD. Once the coenzyme is attached to the
enzyme,it does not come off.
PROBLEM 6Explain why the hydrogens of the methyl group bonded to flavin at C-8 are more acidic

than those of the methyl group bonded at C-7.25.4Thiamine Pyrophosphate: Vitamin 
Thiamine was the first of the B vitamins to be identified,so it became known as vitamin
The absence of thiamine in the diet causes a disease called beriberi,which damages
the heart and impairs nerve reflexes. In extreme cases,it causes paralysis. One major di-

etary source of vitamin is the hulls of rice kernels (p.1035). A deficiency is therefore

most likely to occur when highly polished rice is a major component of the diet. A

deficiency is also seen in alcoholics who are severely malnourished.
B1B1.B1FADH2.CysSFADOONHNNNRHHH2CH3COONHHNNNRH2CH3CHOONHNNNRH3COenzyme-FADenzyme-FADH
2ONHHNNNHRCH2CysSoxidationH3CCH2CysSBBBBBFADH2.ESoxFADNADHNADHEFADH2SredEFADNADNADNADSection 25.4Thiamine Pyrophosphate: Vitamin 
1047B1BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1047
1048CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismThe coenzyme form of vitamin is 
thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP)
. TPP is the
coenzyme required by enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a two-carbon fragment

from one species to another.
Pyruvate decarboxylase is an enzyme that requires thiamine pyrophosphate.
Pyruvate decarboxylate catalyzes the decarboxylation of pyruvate and transfers 

the resulting two-carbon fragment to a proton,resulting in the formation of acet-

aldehyde.You may wonder why an acid such as pyruvate can be decarboxylated,since
the electrons left behind when is removed cannot be delocalized onto the

carbonyl oxygen. We will see that the thiazolium ring of the coenzyme provides a site

for the delocalization of the electrons. A site to which electrons can be delocalized is

called an electron sink
.Mechanism for Pyruvate DecarboxylaseThe hydrogen bonded to the imine carbon of TPP is relatively acidic 
because the ylide carbanion formed when the proton is removed is stabilized by the

adjacent positively charged nitrogen. The ylide carbanion is a good nucleophile.
In the first step of the mechanism for pyruvate decarboxylase,the nucleophilic
carbanion attacks the electrophilic ketone group of the acid. The resulting

intermediate can easily undergo decarboxylation because the electrons left behind

when is removed can be delocalized onto the positively charged nitrogen. The

positively charged nitrogen of TPPis a more effective 
electron sink
than the group of a acid,a class of compounds that are fairly easily decarboxylated

(Section19.17). The product of decarboxylation is stabilized by electron delocaliza-

tion. One of the resonance contributors is neutral and the other has separated

charges
Ñwe will call it a 
resonance-stabilized carbanion
. Protonation of the reso-nance-stabilized carbanion and a subsequent elimination reaction form acetaldehyde

and regenerate the coenzyme.
b-ketob-ketoCO2a-ketoNSCHthiazolium ringpKa  12.7NSHylide carbanionC(pa12.7)CO2a-ketopyruvatean -keto acidOCH3CacetaldehydeHCO2HOOCH3CCO
pyruvate decarboxylaseNNH2NSCNthiamine pyrophosphateTPPCH2H3CH3CCH
2CH2OOOPOOOPOHB1Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) is
required by enzymes that catalyze the

transfer of a two-carbon fragment from

one species to another.
Tutorial:
Mechanism for pyruvate
decarboxylaseBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1048
Section 25.4Thiamine Pyrophosphate: Vitamin 
1049B1PROBLEM 7Draw structures that show the similarity between decarboxylation of the pyruvate
ÐTPP in-termediate and decarboxylation of a acid.
PROBLEM 8Acetolactate synthase is another TPP-requiring enzyme. It also catalyzes the decarboxyla-

tion of pyruvate but transfers the resulting two-carbon fragment to another molecule of

pyruvate,forming acetolactate. This is the first step in the biosynthesis of the amino acids

valine and leucine. Propose a mechanism for acetolactate synthase.
PROBLEM 9Acetolactate synthase can also transfer the two-carbon fragment from pyruvate to
forming This is the first step in the formation
of isoleucine. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.Mechanism for the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase System
A compound must enter the citric acid cycle to be completely metabolized (Figure25.1).
Thus,fats,carbohydrates,and proteins must be converted into compounds that are part

of the citric acid cycle or that can enter the cycle. Acetyl-CoA is the only compound
-ketobutyrateOCH3C-aceto--hydroxybutyrate
CCOOOHCH2CH3CO2OOCH3CH2CCOOOCH3CCOacetolactatesynthaseTPPa-aceto-a-hydroxybutyrate.a-ketobutyrate,pyruvateOOCH3CacetolactateCOHCH3COCO2OO2 CH3CCOacetolactatesynthaseTPPb-ketoCH3BBHHCresonance contributorresonance contributorresonance-stabilized carbanionmechanism for pyruvate decarboxylaseRNSCRNSCRNSCCRNSCRNSCOCCH3COHCH3CH3COOHHHHOOCH3CRNSCOHCOOCH3CRNSCO2COHBBHBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1049
1050CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolismcapable of entering the citric acid cycle (Figure25.3). The final product of carbohydrate
metabolism is pyruvate (Figure25.2). To enter the carboxylic acid cycle,pyruvate must

be converted either to acetyl-CoA or to oxaloacetate (Section25.5)
Ña citric acid cycle
intermediate.The pyruvate dehydrogenase system
is a group of three enzymes responsible for the
conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. The pyruvate dehydrogenase system requires

TPP and four other coenzymes:lipoate,coenzyme A,FAD,and 
The first enzyme in the system catalyzes the reaction of TPP with pyruvate to
form the same resonance-stabilized carbanion formed by pyruvate decarboxylase

and by the enzyme in Problems8 and 9. The second enzyme of the system () re-

quires lipoate,a coenzyme that becomes attached to its enzyme by forming an
amide with the amino group of a lysine side chain. The disulfide linkage of lipoate is

cleaved when it undergoes nucleophilic attack by the carbanion. In the next step,the

TPP carbanion is eliminated from the tetrahedral intermediate. Coenzyme A(CoASH)reacts with the thioester in a transthioesterification reaction (one thioester
is converted into another),substituting coenzyme A for dihydrolipoate. At this point,

the final reaction product (acetyl-CoA) has been formed. However,before another

catalytic cycle can occur,dihydrolipoate must be oxidized back to lipoate. This is

done by the third enzyme an FAD-requiring enzyme (Section25.3). Oxidation

of dihydrolipoate by FAD forms enzyme-bound then oxidizes
back to FAD.
The vitamin precursor of CoASH is pantothenate. We have seen that CoASH is
used in biological systemsto activate carboxylic acids by converting them into

thioesters,which are much more reactive toward nucleophilic acyl substitution reac-
FADH2NADFADH2.(E3),E2pyruvateCO2CoASHOOCH3CCOacetyl-CoAOCH3CSCoApyruvate dehydrogenasesystemNAD.3-D Molecule:Coenzyme ACoASHNADH + HNADSSOCNH(CH2)4E2FADH2E3CH3SCoACNSRSHSHOCNH(CH2)4E2COFADE
3FADE3CH3SSHOCNH(CH2)4E2COdihydrolipoateacetyl-CoABBHCresonance-stabilizedcarbanionmechanism for the pyruvate dehydrogenase systemNSSSOCRNH(CH2)4E2CCH3OHCNSSHOCRNH(CH2)4E2COHSCH3lipoateBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1050
Section 25.4Thiamine Pyrophosphate: Vitamin 
1051B1tions than are carboxylic acids (Section17.20). At physiological pH (7.3),a carboxylic
acid would be present in its negatively charged basic form,which could not be

approached by a nucleophile.PROBLEM 10SOLVED
TPP is a coenzyme for transketolase,the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of a ke-
topentose (xylulose-5-phosphate) and an aldopentose (ribose-5-phosphate) into an al-
dotriose (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate) and a ketoheptose (sedoheptulose-7-phosphate).

Notice that the total number of carbon atoms in the reactants and products does not change
Propose a mechanism for this reaction.SOLUTIONThe reaction shows that a two-carbon fragment is transferred from xylulose-
5-phosphate to ribose-5-phosphate. Because TPP transfers two-carbon fragments,we know

that TPP must remove the two-carbon fragment that is to be transferred from xylulose-

5-phosphate. Thus,the reaction must start by TPP attacking the carbonyl group of

xylulose-5-phosphate. We can add an acid group to accept the electrons from the carbonyl

group and a basic group to aid in the removal of the two-carbon fragment. The two-carbon

fragment,that becomes attached to TPP,is a resonance-stabilized carbanion that adds to

the carbonyl group of ribose-5-phosphate. Again,an acid group accepts the electrons from

the carbonyl group,and a basic group aids in the elimination of TPP.
BHB CH2OPO32CH2OPO32OHHHOHOHCCH2OHORNCSHOHHOHCCH2OHRNC S5537.coenzyme ACoASHadenineOPO32OHCH2OOOPOOCH3CH3OHOCCHCNHCH
2CH2CNHCH
2CH2SHPOOO
CH2OdecarboxylatedcysteinepantothenateAMPxylulose-5-PCH2OHCH2OPO32COHOHHOHsedoheptulose-7-PCH2OHCH2OPO32COHOHHOHHOH
HOH
ribose-5-PCH2OPO32HCO
HH
HOHOHOHglyceraldehyde-3-PtransketolaseTPPCH2OPO32HCO
HOH
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1051
1052CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismNotice the similar function of TPP in all TPP-requiring enzymes. In each reaction,
the nucleophilic coenzyme attacks a carbonyl group of the substrate and allows a bond

to that carbonyl group to be broken because the electrons left behind can be delocal-

ized into the thiazolium ring. The resulting two-carbon fragment is then transferred
Ñto a proton in the case of pyruvate decarboxylase,to coenzyme A (via lipoate) in the

pyruvate dehydrogenase system,and to a carbonyl group in Problems8,9,and 10.
PROBLEM 11An unfortunate effect of drinking too much alcohol
Ña hangover
Ñis attributable to the
acetaldehyde formed when ethanol is oxidized. There is some evidence that vitamin can

cure a hangover. How can the vitamin do this?
25.5Biotin: Vitamin H
Biotin(vitaminH) is an unusual vitamin because it can be synthesized by bacteria that
live in the intestine. Consequently,biotin does not have to be included in our diet and

deficiencies are rare. Biotin deficiencies,however,can be found in people who main-

tain a diet high in raw eggs. Egg whites contain a protein (avidin) that binds biotin

tightly and thereby prevents it from acting as a coenzyme. When eggs are cooked,

avidin is denatured,and the denatured protein does not bind biotin. Biotin is attached

to its enzyme by forming an amide with the amino group of a lysine side chain.HNNH
CH2CH2CH2CH2COHOOSHNNH
CH2CH2CH2CH2CNH(CH2)4EOOSbiotinenzyme-bound biotin
B1BBHBCOH
HRCH2OHNCCSNHOCHHOHHOHHOHOCH2OHCH2OPO32CH2OPO32CH2OPO32HOOHCCH2OHHOHHHOHHOHHOHHCOHOHHOHCH2OPO32HOHRCSNRHCO
SBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1052
Section 25.5Biotin: Vitamin H
10533-D Molecule:BiotinBiotinis the coenzyme required by enzymes that catalyze carboxylation of a carbon
adjacent to a carbonyl group. For example,pyruvate carboxylase converts pyruvate
Ñtheend product of carbohydrate metabolism
Ñto oxaloacetate,a citric acid cycle intermedi-
ate (Figure25.2). Acetyl-CoA carboxylase converts acetyl-CoA into malonyl-CoA,one

of the reactions in the anabolic pathway that converts acetyl-CoA into fatty acids

(Section19.21). Biotin-requiring enzymes use bicarbonate for the source of

the carboxyl group that becomes attached to the substrate.Mechanism for BiotinIn addition to requiring bicarbonate,biotin-requiring enzymes require and

ATP. The function of is to decrease the overall negative charge on ATP by

complexing with two of its negatively charged oxygens (Section27.5). Unless its

negative charge is reduced,ATP cannot be approached by a nucleophile. The func-

tion of ATP is to increase the reactivity of bicarbonate by converting it to 
Òactivated
bicarbonate,Óa compound with a good leaving group (Section27.2). Notice that
Òactivated bicarbonate
Óis a mixed anhydride of carbonic acid and phosphoric acid
(Section17.1).
Nucleophilic attack by biotin on activated bicarbonate forms carboxybiotin. Because
the nitrogen of an amide is not nucleophilic,it is likely that the active form of biotin 

has an enolate-like structure. Nucleophilic attack by the substrate (in this case,the

enolate form of acetyl-CoA) on carboxybiotin transfers the carboxyl group from biotin
to the substrate.ADPactivated bicarbonateOMg2OOPOOOOCHOOCbicarbonateOOPOOadenosineOOPOOOPMg2Mg2Mg2(HCO3 )Biotin is required by enzymes that
catalyze the carboxylation of a carbon
adjacent to a carbonyl group.
acetyl-CoAADPHCO3ATPOCH3CSCoAmalonyl-CoAOOOCCH2CSCoAacetyl-CoAcarboxylaseMg2biotinOOHOOPpyruvateADPHCO3ATPOOCH3CCoxaloacetateOOOOCCH2CCOOpyruvatecarboxylaseMg2biotinOOHOOPO NSNHMg22(CH2)4CNH(CH2)4EOOOOCOOPOO ONCOSNHPO3 (CH2)4CNH(CH2)4EOOÒenolate-likeÓ structure ofenzyme-bound biotinMg2BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1053
1054CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismAll biotin-requiring enzymes follow the same three steps:activation of bicarbonate
by ATP,reaction of activated bicarbonate with biotin to form carboxybiotin,and transfer

of the carboxyl group from carboxybiotin to the substrate.25.6Pyridoxal Phosphate: Vitamin 
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)
is the coenzyme required by enzymes that catalyzecertain transformations of amino acids. The coenzyme is derived from pyridoxine,the

vitamin known as vitamin The name 
Òpyridox
alÓindicates that the coenzyme is apyridine aldehyde. A deficiency in vitamin causes anemia; severe deficiencies can

cause seizures and death.Several differentkinds of amino acid transformations are catalyzed by PLP-requiring
enzymes. The most common are decarboxylation,transamination,racemization (the in-

terconversion of 
L-and 
D-amino acids),bond cleavage,and 
RCH2NH3ORCHNH3COCO2EPLPdecarboxylationa,b-elimination.CaCbpyridoxinevitamin B6NHCH2OHOHCH3EHOCH2pyridoxal phosphatePLPNHHCOHCH32O3POCH2Othe coenzyme is bound to theenzyme by means of an imine
linkage with a lysine residueNHHCHOCH3(CH2)42O3POCH2Nhydrogenbond B6B6.B63-D Molecule:Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is required 
by enzymes that catalyze certain
transformations of amino acids.PO43 Mg2CH2OÐSCoACCH2OHSCoACOOCO CH2NCCSCoAOOSNH(CH2)4CNH(CH2)4EOONSNH(CH2)4CNH(CH2)4EOOCH2OOSCoACNSNH(CH2)4CNH(CH2)4EOOOCcarboxybiotinmalonyl-CoACH3OSCoACacetyl-CoAHBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1054
Section 25.6Pyridoxal Phosphate: Vitamin 
1055B6In each of these transformations,one of the bonds to the of the amino
acid substrate is broken in the first step of the reaction. Decarboxylation breaks the

bond joining the carboxyl group to the transamination,racemization,and
break the bond joining the hydrogen to the and 
bond cleavage breaks the bond joining the R group to the 
PLP becomes attached to its enzyme by forming an imine with the amino group of a
lysine side chain. The first step in all PLP-requiring enzymes is a 
transiminationreaction,a reaction in which one imine is converted into another imine. In the transim-

ination reaction,the amino acid substrate reacts with the imine formed by 
PLP and theenzyme,forming a tetrahedral intermediate. The lysine group of the enzyme is expelled,
forming a new imine between 
PLP and the amino acid.COONH2CHbond brokenin decarboxylationbond broken in transamination,racemization, and ,-elimination
bond broken inC      C   bond cleavageRa-carbon.CaCba-carbon;a,b-eliminationa-carbon;a-carbonOOOXCH2CHCOEPLP-elimination,NH3CH3CCOXNH4OOHOCHCHCOREPLPCCbond cleavage
NH3ORCHCH2CONH3ORNH3HEPLPL-amino acidracemizationNH3NH3COORHL-amino acidCOORHD-amino acidCOORCHCOEPLP-ketoglutaratetransaminationORCCOglutamateOOOOOCCH2CH2CCOOOOCCH2CH2CHCONH3NH3BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1055
1056CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismOnce the amino acid has formed an imine with PLP,a bond to the can be
broken because the electrons left behind when the bond breaks can be delocalized onto

the positively charged protonated nitrogen of the pyridine ring. In other words,the

protonated nitrogen of the pyridine ring is an electron sink. If the OH group is re-

moved from the pyridine ring,the cofactor loses much of its activity. Apparently,the

hydrogen bond formed by the OH group helps weaken the bond to the 
Mechanism for DecarboxylationIf the PLP-catalyzed reaction is a decarboxylation,the carboxyl group is removed

from the of the amino acid. Electron rearrangement and protonation of the
of the decarboxylated intermediate by a protonated amino group of a lysine
side chain or by some other acid group then reestablishes the aromaticity of the pyri-

dine ring. The last step in all PLP-requiring enzymes is a transimination reaction with

a lysine side chain,in order to release the product of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction

and regenerate enzyme-bound PLP.
Mechanism for Transamination
The first reaction in the catabolism of most amino acids is replacement of the amino

group of the amino acid by a ketone group. This is called a 
transaminationreaction be-cause the amino group removed from the amino acid is not lost,but is 
transferred
to theketone group of thereby forming glutamate. The enzymes that catalyze

transamination reactions are called aminotransferases
. Transamination allows the amino
groups of the various amino acids to be collected into a single amino acid (glutamate) so

that excess nitrogen can be easily excreted. (Do not confuse 
transamination
withtransimination
,discussed previously.)
a-ketoglutarate,a-carbona-carbona-carbon.a-carbonOOOPE(CH2)4CH3RCHCOPiOPiNH2OtransiminationPiOPiONHNHN
HNHCE(CH2)4CH3RCHCONH2ONHCE(CH2)4CH3RCHCONHOHOHOHCNHHOenzyme-bound PLPamino acid
Ðbound PLPtransiminationOwith E     (CH2)4NH2NHRCHCO2PiOCOENH(CH2)4RCH2NH3HNHRCHBNHRCH2Bmechanism for PLP-catalyzed decarboxylation of an amino acidNHCHONHCHONHCHONHCHOCH3CH3CH3CH3PiOPiOPiOBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1056
Section 25.6Pyridoxal Phosphate: Vitamin 
1057B6In the first step of transamination,a proton is removed from the of the amino
acid bound to PLP. Rearrangement of the electrons and protonation of the carbon

attached to the pyridine ring,followed by hydrolysis of the imine,forms the acid

and pyridoxamine. At this point,the amino group has been removed from the amino acid,

but pyridoxamine has to be converted back to enzyme-bound PLP before another round

of catalysis can occur. Pyridoxamine forms an imine with the second

substrate of the reaction. Removal of a proton from the carbon attached to the pyridine

ring,followed by rearrangement of the electrons and donation of a proton to the
of the substrate forms an imine that,when transiminated with a lysine side
chain,releases glutamate and reforms enzyme-bound PLP.
Notice that the proton transfer steps are reversed in the two phases of the reaction.
Transfer of the amino group of the amino acid to pyridoxal requires removal of the

proton from the and donation of a proton to the carbon bonded to the pyri-

dine ring. Transfer of the amino group of pyridoxamine to requires re-

moval of the proton from the carbon bonded to the pyridine ring and donation of a

proton to the a-carbon.a-ketoglutaratea-carbona-carbona-ketoglutarate,a-ketoa-carbonHCCO
RHBB B B mechanism for PLP-catalyzed transamination of an amino acidtransaminatedamino acidan -keto acid
NHNHCRCCOORCCOORCCOOOOCCH2CH2CCOOOOOHONHN
HH2CCH3PiOHOCH3CH3CH3NHNHCHONH2CHOH2ONH2PiOPiOPiOpyridoxamine-ketoglutarateHBtransiminationwith E     (CH2)4NH2OCCH2CH2CHCOONH3OOCCH2CH2CHCOCH3PiOOOCH3CH3CH3H2OPiOPiOPiONHNHCHONHCHO(CH2)4EOCCH2CH2CCOOONHNHCHBHOOCCH2CH2CCO
OONHNHCHONHglutamateBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1057
1058CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismWithout phenylalanine hydroxylase,the level of phenylala-
nine builds up,and when it reaches a high concentration,it is

transaminated to phenylpyruvate. The high level of phenylpyru-

vate found in urine gave the disease its name.
NH3CH2CHCOOphenylalaninephenylalaninehydroxylaseOCH2CCOOOOOCH2CCOOphenylpyruvateNH3NH3OHCH2CHCOOCH2CHCOOHOHOHOtyrosinedihydroxyphenylaninedopaCH2CH2NH3HOHOdopaminemelaninCH2COOCCH2CCH2COOCHOHOOHpara-hydroxyphenylpyruvatepara-hydroxy-phenylpyruvate
dioxygenaseHCOOCHhomogentisatefumarateacetyl-CoA
homogentisatedioxygenasetyrosineaminotransferaseCHCH2NH3HOHOnorepinephrinenoradrenalineOHCHCH2NH2CH3HOHOepinephrineadrenalinePHENYLKETONURIA: AN INBORNERROR OF METABOLISM
Tyrosine is a nonessential amino acid because the
body can make it by hydroxylating phenylalanine. About 1 in

every 20,000 babies,however,is born without phenylalanine

hydroxylase,the enzyme that converts phenylalanine into tyro-

sine. This genetic disease is called phenylketonuria (PKU).
HEART ATTACKS: ASSESSING 
THE DAMAGEDamage to heart muscle after a myocardial infarc-
tion (a heart attack) allows aminotransferases and other enzymes

to leak from the damaged cells of the heart into the bloodstream.
Following a heart attack,the severity of damage done to the heart
can be determined from the concentrations of alanine amino-

transferase and aspartate aminotransferase in the bloodstream.BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1058
Section 25.6Pyridoxal Phosphate: Vitamin 
1059B6PROBLEM 12Taking into account the pathway for phenylalanine degradation,answer the following
questions:a.What coenzyme and what other organic compound are needed by tyrosine amino-
transferase?b.What bond in homogentisate is oxidized by homogentisate dioxygenase? (
Hint:Keto-enol
tautomerism occurs after oxidation.)c.What compound is used to supply the methyl group needed to convert noradrenaline into
adrenaline? (Hint:See Section10.11.)
PROBLEM 13acids other than can be used to accept the amino group from pyri-
doxamine in enzyme-catalyzed transaminations. What amino acids are formed from the

following acids?
Mechanism for RacemizationThe first step in the PLP-catalyzed racemization of an 
L-amino acid is the same as thefirst step in the PLP-catalyzed transamination of an amino acid
Ñremoval of a proton
from the of the amino acid bound to PLP. In the second step of racemization,

reprotonation occurs on the The proton can be donated to the hybridized
from either side of the plane defined by the double bond. Consequently,both
D-and 
L-amino acids are formed. In other words,the 
L-amino acid is racemized.a-carbonsp2a-carbon.a-carbonOOpyruvateCOOOOoxaloacetateOCCH2CCO
CH3Ca-ketoa-ketoglutaratea-Ketoformed from dopa,which in turn is formed from the transami-
nation of tyrosine. Half of untreated phenylketonurics are dead

by age 20. When a woman with PKU becomes pregnant,she

must return to the low phenylalanine diet she had as a child,be-

cause a high level of phenylalanine can cause abnormal devel-

opment of the fetus.Another genetic disease that results from a deficiency of an
enzyme in the pathway for phenylalanine degradation is al-

captonuria,which is caused by lack of homogentisate dioxy-

genase. The only ill effect of this enzyme deficiency is black

urine. The urine of those afflicted with alcaptonuria turns

black because the homogentisate they excrete immediately

oxidizes in the air.
About 3 days after they begin drinking milk,all babies born
in the United States are tested for high serum phenylalanine

levels,which would indicate a buildup of phenylalanine. If a

baby is found to lack phenylalanine hydroxylase,he or she is

immediately put on a diet low in phenylalanine and high in ty-

rosine. As long as the phenylalanine level is kept under careful

control for the first 5 to 10 years of life,the baby will experi-

ence no adverse effects.
If the diet is not controlled,however,the baby will be se-
verely mentally retarded by the time he or she is a few months

old. Untreated children have paler skin and fairer hair than

other members of their family because they don
Õt synthesize ty-rosine,so their melanin levels are low. Melanin is the precursor

of the compound responsible for skin pigmentation. Melanin is
transiminationOONHN
HNHCHRCO
OCOOCOE(CH2)4RCHCONH3BNHRCHRCHBmechanism for PLP-catalyzed racemization of an L-amino acidBwith E     (CH2)4NH2NHCHONHCHONHCHONHCHOPiOCH3PiOCH3PiOCH3PiOCH3racemizedamino acidBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1059
1060CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismCompare the second step in a PLP-catalyzed transamination with the second step in
a PLP-catalyzed racemization. In an enzyme that catalyzes transamination,an acidic

group at the active site of the enzyme is in position to donate a proton to the carbon at-

tached to the pyridine ring. The enzyme that catalyzes racemization does not have this

acidic group,so the substrate is reprotonated at the In other words,the

coenzymecarries out the chemical reaction,but the 
enzymedetermines the course ofthe reaction.Mechanism for Bond Cleavage
In the first step of the mechanism for PLP-catalyzed bond cleavage,a basic

group at the active site of the enzyme removes a proton from an OH group bonded to

the of the amino acid. This causes the bond to be cleaved. Serine

and threonine are the only two amino acids that can serve as substrates for the reac-

tion because they are the only amino acids with an OH group bonded to their
When serine is the substrate,the product of the cleavage reaction is
formaldehyde when threonine is the substrate,the product of the cleavage

reaction is acetaldehyde Electron rearrangement and protonation of the
of the amino acid,followed by transimination with a lysine side chain,
releases glycine.The formaldehyde formed when serine undergoes bond cleavage never
leaves the active site of the enzyme; it is immediately transferred to tetrahydrofolate

(Section25.8).
PROBLEM 14Propose a mechanism for a PLP-catalyzed Choosing the Bond to Be CleavedIf all PLP-requiring enzymes start with the same substrateÑan amino acid bound topyridoxal phosphate by an imine linkage
Ñhow can three different bonds be cleaved in
the first step of the reaction?The bond cleaved in the first step depends on the confor-

mation of the amino acid that the enzyme binds. There is free rotation about the
bond of the amino acid,and an enzyme can bind any of the possible confor-
mations about this bond. The enzyme will bind the conformation in which the over-

lapping orbitals of the bond to be broken in the first step of the reaction lie parallel to

the porbitals of the conjugated system. In this way,the orbital containing the electrons
left behind when the bond is broken can overlap with the orbitals of the conjugated

system. If such overlap cannot occur,the electrons cannot be delocalized into the con-

jugated system and the carbanion intermediate cannot be stabilized.CaNa,b-elimination.CaCba-carbon(RCH3).(RH);b-carbon.CaCbb-carbonCaCbCACBa-carbon.Tutorial:
Mechanism of PLP-dependent
reactionsOtransiminationglycineORCHCH2COOCHCOOORCHOCHCOE(CH2)4CH2CONH3BNHHBHBmechanism for PLP-catalyzed C     C bond cleavage
with E     (CH2)4NH2NHN
HN
HNHCHONHCHONHCHONHCHOPiOCH3PiOCH3PiOCH3PiOCH3BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1060
Section 25.7Coenzyme Vitamin 
1061B12B12 :PROBLEM 15Which of the following compounds is more easily decarboxylated?
PROBLEM 16Explain why the ability of PLP to catalyze an amino acid transformation is greatly reduced
if a PLP-requiring enzymatic reaction is carried out at a pH at which the pyridine nitrogen

is not protonated.PROBLEM 17Explain why the ability of PLP to catalyze an amino acid transformation is greatly reduced

if the OH substituent of pyridoxal phosphate is replaced by an 
25.7Coenzyme Vitamin 
Enzymes that catalyze certain rearrangement reactions require 
coenzyme a coen-zyme derived from vitamin The structure of vitamin was determined by

Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin,using X-ray crystallography. The vitamin has a cyano

group (or or ) coordinated with cobalt (Section21.11). In coenzyme 

the cyano group is replaced by a group.
5-deoxyadenosylB12,H2OHOB12B12.B12,B12B12 :OCH3.OCH2CH2orCOOCH2CONHN
Himine between PLP and the amino acid:before breaking the    -CÑH bondbefore breaking the    
-CÑCO2 bond  before breaking the      -CÑR bondafter breaking the    
-CÑCO2 bond  after breaking the      
-CÑR bondelectrons left behind after breaking the    -CÑH bondhave been delocalized into the conjugated systemNCRCOONHNCHRNCCOOHCRCOONCCHROONRCCOOHNNÐHÐCO2ÐRBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1061
1062CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismAnimals and plants cannot synthesize vitamin In fact,only a few microorgan-
isms can synthesize it. Humans must obtain all their vitamin from their diet,

particularly from meat. Because vitamin is needed in only very small amounts,

deficiencies caused by consumption of insufficient amounts of the vitamin are rare,

but have been found in vegetarians who eat no animal products. Deficiencies are most

commonly caused by an inability to absorb the vitamin in the intestine. The deficiency

causes pernicious anemia. The following are examples of enzyme-catalyzed reactions

that require coenzyme COOCOOmethylmalonyl-CoAmutaseCH3CHCSCoAOOCH2CH2CSCoAcoenzyme B12methylmalonyl-CoAsuccinyl-CoANH3COO-methylaspartateglutamateglutamatemutaseCH3CHCHCOONH3COOCH2CH2CHCOOcoenzyme B12B12 : B12B12B12.OCH3CH2H3CH3CCH2CH3CH2H2NOCH2CH2CH2CH2CCOOPNH2CH3CH2OHOOONH2H2NCH2CH2COCOCOCH3CH2NH2COHHHHONNHHHcoenzyme B12HHCNNH2CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3HHHHH2NCH2CH2COHCHCOHOH3«2«4«5«1«HOHCH2CNNNNNNNCo(III)NDorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin
(1910Ð1994)was born in Egypt toEnglish parents. She received an

undergraduate degree from

Somerville College,Oxford

University,and earned a Ph.D. from

Cambridge University. She

determined the structures of

penicillin,insulin,and vitamin 

For her work on vitamin she

received the 1964 Nobel Prize in

chemistry. She was a professor of

chemistry at Somerville,where one of

her graduate students was former

Prime Minister of England Margaret

Thatcher. Hodgkin was a founding

member of Pugwash,an organization

whose purpose was to further
communication between scientists on
both sides of the Iron Curtain.
B12,B12.BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1062
Section 25.7Coenzyme Vitamin 
1063B12B12 :In each of these coenzyme Ðrequiring reactions,a group (Y) bonded to one
carbon changes places with a hydrogen bonded to an adjacent carbon.For example,glutamate mutase and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase both catalyze a reac-
tion in which the group bonded to one carbon changes places with a hydrogen

of an adjacent methyl group. In the reaction catalyzed by dioldehydrase,an OH group

changes places with a methylene hydrogen. The resulting product is a hydrate that

loses water to form propanal.
Mechanism for Coenzyme The chemistry of coenzyme takes place at the bond joining the cobalt and the
group. The currently accepted mechanism for dioldehydrase in-
volves an initial homolytic cleavage of this unusually weak bond (26kcalmol or

109kJmol,compared with 99kcalmol or 414kJmol for a bond). Breaking

the bond forms a radical and reduces Co(III) to Co(II). The
radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from the C-1 carbon of the
substrate,thereby becoming A hydroxyl radical () migrates

from C-2 to C-1,creating a radical at C-2. This radical abstracts a hydrogen atom

fromforming the rearranged product and regenerating the
radical that recombines with Co(II) to regenerate the coenzyme.
The enzymeÐcoenzyme complex is then ready for another catalytic cycle. The initial
product is a hydrate that loses water to form propanal,the final product of the reaction.
It is likely that all coenzyme 
Ðrequiring enzymes catalyze reactions by means ofthe same general mechanism. The role of the coenzyme is to provide a way to remove

a hydrogen atom from the substrate. Once the hydrogen atom has been removed,an

adjacent group can migrate to take its place. The coenzyme then gives back the

hydrogen atom,delivering it to the carbon that lost the migrating group.
B125-deoxyadenosyl5-deoxyadenosine,O H5-deoxyadenosine.5-deoxyadenosyl5-deoxyadenosylCH5-deoxyadenosylB12B12COOHYa coenzyme B12-requiring enzymeCCYHCCB12OHOH
a hydratedioldehydraseCH3CHCH2OHCH
3CH2CHOHH2OOCH3CH2CHcoenzyme B121,2-propanediolpropanalOHHOCH3HCHCAdCH
2Co(III)HOHHOCH3HCHCAdCH
2Co(II)HOHHOCH3HCCAdCH
3Co(II)HOH2OCH3HCHCAdCH2Co(III)HOHHOCH3HCHCAdCH2Co(II)HOHHOCH3HCCAdCH2Co(II)Hthe role of 5«-deoxyadenosylcobalamin in a coenzyme B12-requiring enzyme-catalyzed reactionHa hydratepropanal3-D Molecule:Coenzyme B12Coenzyme is required by enzymes
that catalyze the exchange of a
hydrogen bonded to one carbon with a

group bonded to an adjacent carbon.
B12BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1063
1064CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismPROBLEM 18Ethanolamine ammonia lyase,a coenzyme 
Ðrequiring enzyme,catalyzes the following
reaction:Propose a mechanism for this reaction.PROBLEM 19A fatty acid with an even number of carbon atoms is metabolized to acetyl-CoA,which can
enter the citric acid cycle. A fatty acid with an odd number of carbon atoms is metabolized

to acetyl-CoA and one equivalent of propionyl-CoA. Two coenzyme-requiring enzymes

are needed to convert propionyl-CoA into succinyl-CoA,a citric acid cycle intermediate.

Write the two enzyme-catalyzed reactions and indicate the required coenzymes.
25.8Tetrahydrofolate: Folic Acid
Tetrahydrofolate (THF)
is the coenzyme used by enzymes catalyzing reactions that
transfer a group containing a single carbon to their substrates. The one-carbon group

can be a methyl group a methylene group or a formyl group 

Tetrahydrofolate results from the reduction of two double bonds of folic acid (folate),

its precursor vitamin. Bacteria synthesize folate,but mammals cannot.
There are six different THF-coenzymes. transfers a methyl group
transfers a methylene group and the others
transfer a formyl group N5-methyl-THFH2NHNNHRNHNNCH3ON5,N10-methylene-THFH2NHNNRNHNNH2CON5,N10-methenyl-THFH2NHNNRNHNNHCO(HCO).(CH2),10-methylene-THF5,(CH3),5-Methyl-THF(HCO).(CH2),(CH3),HOCH2CH2NH2CH3CHONH3ethanolamineammonia lyaseB12Tetrahydrofolate (THF) is the coenzyme
required by enzymes that catalyze the

transfer of a group containing one

carbon to their substrates.H2NHNHNCOCOOONNNNHCHCH2CH2COOH2NHNHNCOCOOONHNNHNHCHCH2CH2COO2-amino-4-oxo-6-methylpteridinep-aminobenzoicacidglutamatefolic acid (folate)tetrahydrofolate510THF23451018769BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1064
Section 25.8Tetrahydrofolate: Folic Acid
10653-D Molecule:Tetrahydrofolate (THF)
Homocysteine methyl transferase and glycinamide ribonucleotide (GAR) trans-
formylase are examples of enzymes that require THF-coenzymes.
Thymidylate Synthase: The Enzyme That Converts UÕs into TÕsThe heterocyclic bases in RNA are adenine,guanine,cytosine,and uracil (A,G,C,
and U); the heterocyclic bases in DNA are adenine,guanine,cytosine,and thymine

(A,G,C,and T). In other words,the heterocyclic bases in RNA and DNA are the

same,except that RNA contains U
Õs,whereas DNA contains T
Õs (Sections27.1and
27.14). The TÕs used for the biosynthesis of DNA are synthesized from U
Õs bythymidylate synthase,an enzyme that requires as a coen-

zyme. Even though the only structural difference between a U and a T is a 
methylgroup,a T is synthesized by first transferring a 
methylenegroup to a U.In the first step of the reaction catalyzed by thymidylate synthase,a nucleophilic
cysteine group at the active site of the enzyme attacks the of uridine. (This is

an example of conjugate addition; see Section18.13.) A subsequent nucleophilic at-

tack by the of uridine on the methylene group of 

forms a covalent bond between uridine and the coenzyme. A proton on the of

uridine is removed with the help of a basic group at the active site of the enzyme,elim-

inating the coenzyme. Transfer of a hydride ion from the coenzyme to uridine and

elimination of the enzyme forms thymidine and dihydrofolate (DHF).a-carbon10-methylene-THF5,a-carbonb-carbon10-methylene-THF5,GAR transformylaseCH2Cribose-5-phosphateON10-formyl-THFNH2NHCH2CHOCribose-5-phosphateOTHFNHNHN5-formyl-THFH2NHNNHRNHNNCHOCH
OON10-formyl-THFH2NHNNCHNHNRNHNNHON5-formimino-THFH2NHNNHRNHNOhomocysteinemethionine
homocysteinemethyl transferaseHSCH2CH2CHCOON5-methyl-THFNH3CH3SCH2CH2CHCOOTHFNH3N5,N10-methylene-THF2-deoxyuridine5-monophosphatedUMPR2-deoxyribose-5-phosphate
H2NCH3HNHNNRNHNNNRH2COOOthymidylatesynthasedihydrofolate2-deoxythymidine5-monophosphatedTMPDHFH2NHNHNNHRNHNNNROOOBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1065
1066CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismTutorial:
Mechanism for catalysis by
thymidylate synthaseNotice that the coenzyme initially transfers a methylene group to the substrate.
The methylene group is subsequently reduced to a methyl group. Because the coen-
zyme is the reducing agent,it is simultaneously oxidized. The oxidized coenzyme is

dihydrofolate.When the reaction is over,dihydrofolate must be converted back to 
so that the coenzyme can undergo another catalytic cycle. Dihydro-
folate is first reduced to tetrahydrofolate.Then serine hydroxymethyl transferase
ÑthePLP-requiring enzyme that cleaves the bond of serine to form glycine and

formaldehydeÑtransfers formaldehyde to the coenzyme (Section25.6). In other
words,the formaldehyde that is cleaved off serine is immediately transferred to THF

to form which is fortunate because formaldehyde is cyto-

toxic. (It kills cells.)Cancer ChemotherapyCancer is associated with rapidly growing and proliferating cells. Because cells cannot

multiply if they cannot synthesize DNA,several cancer chemotherapeutic agents have

been developed to inhibit thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase. If a cell

cannot make thymidine,it cannot synthesize DNA. Inhibiting dihydrofolate reductase

also prevents the synthesis of thymidine because cells have a limited amount of

tetrahydrofolate. If they cannot convert dihydrofolate back to tetrahydrofolate,they

cannot continue to synthesize thymidine.10-methylene-THF,5,CaCbmethylene-THF10-5,OO OO SESEBBH2CNRONNHNNRH2NHNNONHNHNRH2NHNNOHNHNHNRH2NHNN_RHNOONRHNHNOOSEBSESEBHHCH2CH3OONRHNCH2ONNHNHNRH2NHNNRHNmechanism for catalysis by thymidylate synthaseoxidizedcoenzymeHBHBBÐBHBBÐdihydrofolatereductase
dihydrofolateNADPHH
tetrahydrofolateNADP
serine hydroxymethyltransferasetetrahydrofolateHOCH
2CHCOON5,N10-methylene-THFCH
2COONH3NH3PLPserineglycine
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1066
Section 25.8Tetrahydrofolate: Folic Acid
1067A common anticancer drug that inhibits thymidylate synthase is 5-fluorouracil.
5-Fluorouracil and uracil react with thymidylate synthase in the same way. However,

the fluorine at the 5-position cannot be removed by the base in the third step of the re-

action because fluorine is too electronegative to come off as Because fluorine can-

not be removed,the reaction stops at this point,leaving the enzyme permanently

attached to the substrate. The active site of the enzyme is now blocked with 5-fluoro-

uracil,so the enzyme cannot bind uracil,which means that thymidine can no longer be

synthesized. Consequently,the synthesis of DNA is also stopped. Unfortunately,most

anticancer drugs cannot discriminate between diseased and normal cells. As a result,

cancer chemotherapy is accompanied by terrible side effects. However,cancer cells

undergo uncontrolled cell division so,because they are dividing more rapidly than

normal cells,they are harder hit by cancer-fighting chemotherapeutic agents.
5-Fluorouracil is a mechanism-based inhibitor
Ñit inactivates the enzyme by
taking part in the normal catalytic mechanism. It is also called a suicide inhibitorbecause when the enzyme reacts with it,the enzyme 
Òcommits suicide.ÓThe use of5-fluorouracil illustrates the importance of knowing the mechanism for an enzyme-

catalyzed reaction. If you know the mechanism,you may be able to design an inhibitor

to turn the reaction off at a certain step.
Aminopterin and methotrexate are anticancer drugs that are inhibitors of dihydrofo-
late reductase. Because their structures are similar to that of dihydrofolate,they com-

pete with it for binding at the active site of the enzyme. Since they bind 1000 times

more tightly to the enzyme than does dihydrofolate,they inhibit the enzyme. These

two compounds are examples of 
competitive inhibitors
.Because aminopterin and methotrexate inhibit the synthesis of THF,they interfere
with the synthesis of any compound that requires a THF-coenzyme in one of the steps

of its synthesis. Thus,not only do they prevent the synthesis of thymidine but they also

inhibit the synthesis of adenine and guanineÑother heterocyclic compounds needed
OCCOOHNCHCH2CH2COONNNNNNH2H2NRR  HR  CH3NNNH2H2NCH2OCH3OCH3OCH3aminopterinmethotrexatetrimethoprim5-fluorouracil5-FUOOHNNHFthe enzyme has becomeirreversibly attached to the substrateOOOHNNRCH2H2NNNHNHNRFSBEHNF.BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1067
PROBLEM 20What is the source of the methyl group in thymidine?25.9Vitamin Vitamin K
Vitamin K is required for proper clotting of blood. The letter K comes from 
koagulation
,which is German for Òclotting.ÓA series of reactions utilizing six proteins is involved in
blood clotting. In order for blood to clot,the blood-clotting proteins must bind Vi-

taminK is required for proper binding. VitaminK deficiencies are rare because the

vitamin is synthesized by intestinal bacteria. VitaminK is also found in the leaves of

green plants. Vitamin 
(the hydroquinone of vitaminK) is the coenzyme form of
the vitamin (Section20.12).
Vitamin is the coenzyme for the enzyme that catalyzes the carboxylation of
the of glutamate side chains in proteins,forming 
complex much more effectively than glutamates do.The
Ca2g-Carboxyglutamatesg-carboxyglutamates.g-carbonKH2OOvitamin Ka quinoneOHOHvitamin KH2a hydroquinoneKH2Ca2Ca2.KH2 :1068CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismDonald D. Woods (1912
Ð1964)wasborn in Ipswich,England,and

received a B.A. and a Ph.D. from

Cambridge University. He worked in

Paul Flores
Õs laboratory at the
London Hospital Medical College.
for the synthesis of DNA
Ñbecause their synthesis also requires a THF-coenzyme.
One clinical technique used in chemotherapy to fight cancer calls for the patient to be

given a lethal dose of methotrexate and then to 
Òsave
Óhim or her by administeringTrimethoprim is used as an antibiotic because it binds to bacterial dihydrofolate
reductase much more tightly than to mammalian dihydrofolate reductase.5-formyl-THF.Paul B. Flores (1882
Ð1971)wasborn in London. He moved his

laboratory to Middlesex Hospital

Medical School when a bacterial

chemistry unit was established there.

He was knighted in 1946.THE FIRST ANTIBACTERIAL DRUGSSulfonamidesÑcommonly known as sulfa drugs
Ñwere introduced clinically in 1934 as the first effective antibacte-

rial drugs (Section30.4). Donald Woods,a British bacteriologist,

noticed that sulfanilamide,initially the most widely used sul-
fonamide,was structurally similar to 
p-aminobenzoic acid,a
compound necessary for bacterial growth. He proposed that

sulfanilamide
Õs antibacterial properties were due to its being
able to block the normal utilization of p-aminobenzoic acid.3-D Molecule:Vitamin K
a sulfonamidesulfanilamide
H2NSNHR
OOH2NSNH
2O
Op-aminobenzoic acidH2NCOH
OWoods and Paul Flores suggested that sulfanilamide acts by
inhibiting the enzyme that incorporates p-aminobenzoic acidinto folic acid. Because the enzyme cannot tell the difference

between sulfanilamide and 
p-aminobenzoic acid,both com-
pounds compete for the active site of the enzyme. Humans are
not adversely affected by the drug because they do not synthe-

size folateÑthey get all their folate from their diets.
AU:OKas changed?
As set, it sounds like the drug has no effects on humans.
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1068
Section 25.9Vitamin Vitamin K
1069KH2 :Vitamin is required by the enzyme
that catalyzes the carboxylation of theof a glutamate side chain in aprotein.
G-carbonKH2proteins involved in blood clotting all have several glutamates near their N-terminal
ends. For example,prothrombin has glutamates at positions 7,8,15,17,20,21,26,27,

30,and 33.
The mechanism for the vitamin 
Ðcatalyzed carboxylation of glutamate hadpuzzled chemists because the that must be removed from glutamate before it

can attack is not very acidic. The mechanism,therefore,must involve the creation

of a strong base. The following mechanism has been proposed by Paul Dowd:The vi-

tamin loses a proton from a phenolic OH group,and the base that is thereby formed at-

tacks molecular oxygen. A dioxetane is formed and then collapses to give a vitamin K

base that is strong enough to remove a proton from the of glutamate. The

glutamate carbanion attacks to form and the protonated vit-

aminK base (a hydrate) loses water,forming vitaminK epoxide.
g-carboxyglutamate,CO2g-carbonCO2g-protonKH2Paul Dowd (1936
Ð1996)was born inBrockton,Massachusetts. He did his

undergraduate work at Harvard

University and received a Ph.D. from

Columbia University. He was a

professor of chemistry at Harvard

University and was a professor of

chemistry from 1970 to 1996 at the

University of Pittsburgh.
ONHCH
OCenzymevitamin KH2CO2CH2CH2OOCCOONHCH
OCCa2CH2CHCOOCa2OCCOONHCH
OCCH2CHglutamate side chain-carboxyglutamate side chain
calcium complexBOOHROOOOHROOOHORmechanism for the vitamin KH2-dependent carboxylation of glutamateOOOHORa dioxetaneHBHOOOCO
OOOCCO
H2OOOHORNHCHCCH2CHHCOOONHCHCCH2CHCOOOCHNHC
CH2CHOOHOHOROOORvitamin K basevitamin K epoxide-carboxyglutamateBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1069
PROBLEM 21Thiols such as ethanethiol and propanethiol can be used to reduce vitaminK epoxide back
to vitamin but they react much more slowly than dihydrolipoate. Explain.
KH2,1070CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ MetabolismVitaminK epoxide is reduced back to vitamin by an enzyme that uses the
coenzyme dihydrolipoate as the reducing agent. The epoxide is first reduced to vita-

minK,which is then further reduced to vitamin 
Warfarin and dicoumarol are used clinically as anticoagulants. Warfarin is also a
common rat poison,causing death by internal bleeding. These compounds prevent

clotting by inhibiting the enzyme that reduces vitaminK epoxide to vitamin 

thereby preventing the carboxylation of glutamate. The enzyme cannot tell the differ-

ence between these two compounds and vitaminK epoxide,so the compounds act as

competitive inhibitors
.VitaminE has recently been found to be an anticoagulant. It directly inhibits the
enzyme that carboxylates glutamate residues.CH2CCH3OOOOHOOOOOHOH
warfarindicoumarol
KH2,KH2.KH2TOO MUCH BROCCOLIAn article describing two women with diseases
characterized by abnormal blood clotting reportedthat they did not improve when they were given warfarin. When

questioned about their diets,one woman said that she ate at

least a pound (0.45kg) of broccoli every day,and the other ate

broccoli soup and a broccoli salad every day. When broccoli

was removed from their diets,warfarin became effective in pre-

venting the abnormal clotting of their blood. Because broccoli

is high in vitaminK,these patients had been getting enough di-

etary vitaminK to compete with the drug,thereby making the

drug ineffective.
OOSHOOROHOHRSSRRSHSH
SSRRSH H2OORvitamin K epoxidevitamin K vitamin KH
2 BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1070
Problems1071SummaryCofactorsassist enzymes in catalyzing a variety of reac-
tions that cannot be catalyzed solely by their amino acid

side chains. Cofactors can be metal ions or organic mole-

cules. An enzyme with a tightly bound metal ion is called a

metalloenzyme. Cofactors that are organic molecules are
called coenzymesand these are derived from 
vitamins. Avitamin is a substance the body cannot synthesize that is

needed in small amounts for normal body function. All the

water-soluble vitamins except vitaminC function as coen-

zymes. VitaminK is the only water-insoluble vitamin cur-

rently recognized to function as a coenzyme.Coenzymes play a variety of chemical roles that the
amino acid side chains of enzymes cannot play:Some func-

tion as oxidizing and reducing agents; some allow electrons

to be delocalized; some activate groups for further reaction;

and some provide good nucleophiles or strong bases needed

for a reaction. Molecular recognition
allows the enzyme to
bind the substrate and the coenzyme in the proper orienta-

tion for reaction. Coenzymes are recycled. An enzyme plus

its cofactor is called a 
holoenzyme. An enzyme that has had
its cofactor removed is called an 
apoenzyme.MetabolismÑthe set of reactions that living organisms
carry out to obtain energy and to synthesize the compounds

they require
Ñcan be divided into 
catabolismandanabolism. Catabolic reactions
break down complex mol-
ecules to provide energy and simple molecules. 
Anabolicreactions
require energy and lead to the synthesis of com-
plex biomolecules.
The coenzymes used by enzymes to catalyze oxidation re-
actions are FAD
,and 
FMN; those used toNADP,NAD,catalyze reduction reactions are NADH
,NADPH
,and Many enzymes that catalyze oxidation reac-

tions are called dehydrogenases
. All the redox chemistry of
the pyridine nucleotide coenzymestakes place at the 4-po-
sition of the pyridine ring. All the redox chemistry of the

flavin coenzymes
takes place on the flavin ring.
Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP)
is the coenzyme re-quired by enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a two-car-

bon fragment. Biotinis the coenzyme required by enzymesthat catalyze carboxylation of a carbon adjacent to a car-
bonyl group. 
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)
is the coenzymerequired by enzymes that catalyze certain transformations

of amino acids:decarboxylation,transamination,racemiza-

tion,bond cleavage,and In a

transimination reaction
,one imine is converted into an-
other imine; in a transamination reaction
,the amino
group is removed from a substrate and transferred to anoth-

er molecule.In a coenzyme Ðrequiring reaction,a group bonded
to one carbon changes places with a hydrogen bonded to

an adjacent carbon. Tetrahydrofolate (THF)
is the coen-zyme used by enzymes catalyzing reactions that transfer

a group containing a single carbonÑmethyl,methylene,
or formylÑto their substrates. Vitamin
is the coen-zyme for the enzyme that catalyzes the carboxylation of
the of glutamate side chains
Ña reaction re-quired for blood clotting. A 
suicide inhibitorinactivates
an enzyme by taking part in the normal catalytic mecha-
nism. Competitive inhibitors
compete with the substratefor binding at the active site of the enzyme.
g-carbonKH2B12b-elimination.a,CaCbFMNH2.FADH2,Key Terms
anabolism (p.1035)
apoenzyme (p.1034)

biotin (p.1052)

catabolism (p.1035)

coenzyme (p.1033)

coenzyme A (CoASH) (p.1050)

coenzyme (p.1061)

cofactor (p.1033)

competitive inhibitor (p.1067)

dehydrogenase (p.1040)

electron sink (p.1048)
B12flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) (p.1044)
flavin mononucleotide (FMN) (p.1044)

holoenzyme (p.1034)

lipoate (p.1050)

mechanism-based inhibitor (p.1067)

metabolism (p.1035)

metalloenzyme (p.1033)

nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide() (p.1039)
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotidephosphate () (p.1039)
NADPNADnucleotide (p.1039)
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) (p.1054)

suicide inhibitor (p.1067)

tetrahydrofolate (THF) (p.1064)

thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) (p.1048)

transamination (p.1056)

transimination (p.1055)

vitamin (p.1033)

vitamin (p.1068)
KH2Problems
22.Answer the following questions:
a.What six cofactors act as oxidizing agents?

b.What are the cofactors that donate one-carbon groups?
Author:term is boldface in text.Add to
key terms? Or make lightface in text?
heterocycle (p.1039)
BRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1071
1072CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolismc.What three one-carbon groups are various tetrahydrofolates capable of donating to substrates?
d.What is the function of FAD in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex?

e.What is the function of in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex?

f.What is the reaction necessary for proper blood clotting catalyzed by vitamin 

g.What coenzymes are used for decarboxylation reactions?

h.What kinds of substrates do the decarboxylating coenzymes work on?

i.What coenzymes are used for carboxylation reactions?

j.What kinds of substrates do the carboxylating coenzymes work on?
23.Name the coenzymes that
a.allow electrons to be delocalizedc.provide a good nucleophile

b.activate groups for further reactiond.provide a strong base
24.For each of the following reactions,name the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction and name the required coenzyme:
a.b.c.d.e.f.25.S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM) is formed from the reaction between ATP (Section10.11) and methionine. The other product of the
reaction is triphosphate. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.26.Five coenzymes are required by dehydrogenase,the enzyme in the citric acid cycle that converts to
succinyl-CoA.
a.Identify the coenzymes.

b.Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
-ketoglutarate dehydrogenasesuccinyl-CoA-ketoglutarateCOOOOOCCH2CH2CCO2OOOCCH2CH2CSCoAa-ketoglutaratea-ketoglutarateECH3CH3CH2CSCoAOOCCHCSCoAOOEOCCH2CH2CCOOOOCCH2CCOOOOOOCCH2CH2CHCOÐOONH3OCCH2CHCOOONH3Ea catabolic reactionCH3CCO
OOCH3CHOHCOOECH3OCCHCSCoAOOOCCH2CH2CSCoAOOEOSHSH
(CH2)4COOSS(CH2)4COEATP, Mg2, HCO3CH3CSCoAOOCCH2CSCoAOOKH2 ?NADBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1072
Problems107327.Give the products of the following reaction,where T is tritium:
(Hint:Tritium is a hydrogen atom with two neutrons. Although a bond breaks four times more slowly than a bond,it
is still the first bond in the substrate that breaks.)
28.Propose a mechanism for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase,the enzyme that converts methylmalonyl-CoA into succinyl-CoA.
29.When transaminated,the three branched-chain amino acids (valine,leucine,and isoleucine) form compounds that have the
characteristic odor of maple syrup. An enzyme known as branched-chain acid dehydrogenase converts these compounds

into CoA esters. People who do not have this enzyme have the genetic disease known as maple syrup urine disease
Ñso-calledbecause their urine smells like maple syrup.
a.Give the structures of the compounds that smell like maple syrup.

b.Give the structures of the CoA esters.

c.Branched-chain acid dehydrogenase has five coenzymes. Identify them.

d.Suggest a way to treat maple syrup urine disease.
30.When UMP is dissolved in (see Problem27),exchange of T for H occurs at the 5-position. Propose a
mechanism for this exchange.
31.Dehydratase is a pyridoxal-requiring enzyme that catalyzes an reaction. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
32.In addition to the reactions mentioned in Section25.6,PLP can catalyze reactions. Propose a mechanism for the
following PLP-catalyzed reaction:
33.PLP can catalyze both reactions (Problem31) and reactions. Propose a mechanism for the
following PLP-catalyzed 
EPLPXCH2CH2CHCONH3XOCH3CH2CCOOONH4g-elimination:b,g-eliminationb,b-eliminationa,EPLPXCH2CHCONH3XOYCH2CHCOONH3Yb-substitutionb-substitutiondehydratasePLPHOCH2CHCONH3NH4OCH3CCOOOb-eliminationa,T2Oribose-5«-phosphateUMPOOHHNNribose-5«-phosphateOOTHNNTtritium;T2Oa-ketoa-ketoCHCTdioldehydrasecoenzyme B12CH2Co(III)AdCH3CCOH
OHTTTBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1073
1074CHAPTER 25The Organic Mechanisms of the Coenzymes ¥ Metabolism34.The glycine cleavage system is a group of four enzymes that together catalyze the following reaction:
Use the following information to determine the sequence of reactions involved in the glycine cleavage system:
a.The first enzyme involved in the reaction is a PLP-requiring decarboxylase.

b.The second enzyme is aminomethyltransferase. This enzyme has a lipoate coenzyme.

c.The third enzyme is an synthesizing enzyme. It catalyzes a reaction that forms as one of the
products.d.The fourth enzyme is an FAD-requiring enzyme.

e.The cleavage system also requires 
35.Nonenzyme-bound FAD is a stronger oxidizing agent than How,then,can oxidize the reduced flavoenzyme in the
pyruvate dehydrogenase system?
36.reduces thioesters to saturated thioesters. The reaction is thought to take place by a mechanism that
involves radicals. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
FADH2RCHCHCSRRCH
2CH2CSROOFADb-unsaturateda,FADH2NADNAD.NAD.NH410-methylene-THF5,glycine cleavage systemTHFglycineCO2N5,N10-methylene-THFBRUI25-1033_1074r2  29-03-2003  1:56 PM  Page 1074
The solubility of lipids in nonpolar organic solvents results from their significant
hydrocarbon component. The hydrocarbon portion of the compound is responsible

for its ÒoilinessÓor Òfattiness.ÓThe word 
lipidcomes from the Greek 
lipos,which
means Òfat.Ó
26Lipids001stearic acidlinoleic acidLipidsareorganic compounds,found in living organisms,that are
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. Because compounds 

are classified as lipids on the basis of a physical propertyÑ
their solubility in an organic solventÑrather than as a result of their

structures,lipids have a variety of structures and functions,as the

following examples illustrate:
COOHCH2OHOHHCH3CH3CH2CH2CHCH3CH3CH2OHPGE1a vasodilatorcortisonea hormonevitamin Aa vitamintristearina fatlimonenein orange andlemon oilsHOHHOHOHHH3CH3COCOOOOOOOOCH3BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 01
002CHAPTER 26Lipids
MeltingNumberpointof carbonsCommon nameSystematic nameStructure
CSaturatedlauric aciddodecanoic acid44
myristic acidtetradecanoic acid58
palmitic acidhexadecanoic acid63
stearic acidoctadecanoic acid69
arachidic acideicosanoic acid77
Unsaturatedpalmitoleic acid(9Z)-hexadecenoic acid0oleic acid(9Z)-octadecenoic acid13linoleic acid(9Z,12Z)-octadecadienoic acid5linolenic acid(9Z,12Z,15Z)-octadecatrienoic acid11arachidonic acid(5Z,8Z,11
Z,14Z)-eicosatetraenoic acid50EPA
(5Z,8Z,11
Z,14Z,17Z)-eicosapentaenoic acid50COOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOHCOOH1214161820161818182020Table 26.1
Common Naturally Occurring Fatty Acids26.1Fatty AcidsFatty acids
are carboxylic acids with long hydrocarbon chains. The fatty acids most
frequently found in nature are shown in Table26.1. Because they are synthesized from

acetate,a compound with two carbon atoms,most naturally occurring fatty acids con-

tain an even number of carbon atoms and are unbranched. The mechanism for the

biosynthesis of fatty acids is discussed in Section19.21. Fatty acids can be saturated

with hydrogen (and therefore have no carbon
Ðcarbon double bonds) or unsaturated(have carbon
Ðcarbon double bonds). Fatty acids with more than one double bond are
called polyunsaturated fatty acids. Double bonds in naturally occurring unsaturated
fatty acids are never conjugated
Ñthey are always separated by one methylene group.
The physical properties of a fatty acid depend on the length of the hydrocarbon
chain and the degree of unsaturation. As expected,the melting points of saturated fatty

acids increase with increasing molecular weight because of increased van der Waals

interactions between the molecules (Section2.9).
Thedouble bonds in unsaturated fatty acids generally have the cis configuration. This
configuration produces a bend in the molecules,which prevents them from packing

together as tightly as fully saturated fatty acids. As a result,unsaturated fatty acids have
3-D Molecules:Stearic acid; Oleic acid;
Linoleic acid; Linolenic acidBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 02
Section 26.1Fatty Acids
003OMEGA FATTY ACIDS
Omega
is a term used to indicate the position ofthe first double bondÑfrom the methyl endÑin an
unsaturated fatty acid. For example,linoleic acid is called
omega-6 fatty acid because its first double bond is after the sixth

carbon,and linolenic acid is called omega-3 fatty acid because

its first double bond is after the third carbon. Mammals lack the

enzyme that introduces a double bond beyond C-9 (the carboxyl

carbon is C-1). Linoleic acid and linolenic acids,therefore,are

essential fatty acids for mammals. In other words,the acids must

be included in the diet because,although they cannot be synthe-

sized,they are required for normal body function.
linoleic acidlinolenic acid
COOHomega-3fatty acidCOOHomega-6
fatty acidmissing art 26PYB02
fewer intermolecular interactions and,therefore,lower melting points than saturated
fatty acids with comparable molecular weights (Table26.1). The melting points of the

unsaturated fatty acids decrease as the number of double bonds increases. For example,

an 18-carbon fatty acid melts at 69
¡C if it is saturated,at 13
¡C if it has one double bond,at if it has two double bonds,and at if it has three double bonds.
11 ¡C5 ¡Coleic acidan 18-carbon fatty acidwith one double bondstearic acidan 18-carbon fatty acid
with one double bondlinoleic acidan 18-carbon fatty acid
with three double bondslinolenic acidan 18-carbon fatty acid
with three double bondsPROBLEM 1Explain the difference in the melting points of the following fatty acids:
a.palmitic acid and stearic acidc.oleic acid and linoleic acid
b.palmitic acid and palmitoleic acid
PROBLEM 2What products are formed when arachidonic acid reacts with excess ozone followed by
treatment with (
Hint:See Section20.8.)
H2O2  ?Art to be fixed
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:32 PM  Page 0326.2Waxes
Waxes
are esters formed from long-chain carboxylic acids and long-chain alcohols.For example,beeswax,the structural material of beehives,has a 16-carbon carboxylic

acid component and a 30-carbon alcohol component. The word 
waxcomes from theOld English weax,meaning Òmaterial of the honeycomb.
ÓCarnauba wax is a par-
ticularly hard wax because of its relatively high molecular weight,arising from a

32-carbon carboxylic acid component and a 34-carbon alcohol component. Carnauba
wax is widely used as a car wax and in floor polishes.
Waxes are common in living organisms. The feathers of birds are coated with wax to
make them water repellent. Some vertebrates secrete wax in order to keep their fur lubri-

cated and water repellent. Insects secrete a waterproof,waxy layer on the outside of their

exoskeletons. Wax is also found on the surfaces of certain leaves and fruits,where it

serves as a protectant against parasites and minimizes the evaporation of water.
26.3Fats and OilsTriacylglycerols
,also called triglycerides,are compounds in which the three OH
groups of glycerol are esterified with fatty acids. If the three fatty acid components of a

triacylglycerol are the same,the compound is called a 
simple triacylglycerol
. Mixedtriacylglycerols
,on the other hand,contain two or three different fatty acid compo-
nents and are more common than simple triacylglycerols. Not all triacylglycerol mole-

cules from a single source are necessarily identical; substances such as lard and olive

oil,for example,are mixtures of several different triacylglycerols (Table26.2).
Raindrops on a feather004CHAPTER 26Lipids
Table 26.2Approximate Percentage of Fatty Acids in Some Common Fats and Oils
Saturated fatty acidsUnsaturated fatty acids
mplauricmyristicpalmiticstearicoleiclinoleiclinolenic
(¡C)Animal fatsButter32211299274
ÑLard30
Ñ12812486
ÑHuman fat15132584610
ÑWhale blubber24
Ñ81233510
ÑPlant oilsCorn20
Ñ11035034
ÑCottonseed1
Ñ12312348
ÑLinseed24
ÑÑ63192447
Olive6
ÑÑ72845
ÑPeanut3
ÑÑ835626
ÑSafflower15
ÑÑ3319703
Sesame6
ÑÑ1044540
ÑSoybean16
ÑÑ10229517
C18C18C18C18C16C14C12a major component ofbeeswaxstructural material of beehivesCH3(CH2)24CO(CH2)29CH3Oa major component ofcarnauba waxcoating on the leavesof a Brazilian palmCH3(CH2)30CO(CH2)33CH3Oa major component ofspermaceti waxfrom the heads ofsperm whalesCH3(CH2)14CO(CH2)15CH3OLayers of honeycomb in a beehiveBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 04
Section 26.3Fats and Oils
005Triacylglycerols that are solids or semisolids at room temperature are called 
fats.Fats are usually obtained from animals and are composed largely of triacylglycerols

with either saturated fatty acids or fatty acids with only one double bond. The saturat-

ed fatty acid tails pack closely together,giving the triacylglycerols relatively high

melting points,causing them to be solids at room temperature.
Liquid triacylglycerols are called 
oils. Oils typically come from plant products suchas corn,soybeans,olives,and peanuts. They are composed primarily of triacylglycerols

with unsaturated fatty acids that cannot pack tightly together. Consequently,they have

relatively low melting points,causing them to be liquids at room temperature. The

approximate fatty acid compositions of some common fats and oils are shown in

Table26.2.
Some or all of the double bonds of polyunsaturated oils can be reduced by catalytic
hydrogenation (Section4.11). Margarine and shortening are prepared by hydrogenat-

ing vegetable oils such as soybean oil and safflower oil until they have the desired con-

sistency. This process is called 
Òhardening of oils.ÓThe hydrogenation reaction mustbe carefully controlled,however,because reducing all the carbon
Ðcarbon doublebonds would produce a hard fat with the consistency of beef tallow.
Vegetable oils have become popular in food preparation because some studies have
linked the consumption of saturated fats with heart disease. Recent studies have shown

that unsaturated fats may also be implicated in heart disease. However,one

unsaturated fatty acid
Ña 20-carbon fatty acid with five double bonds,known as EPA
and found in high concentrations in fish oils
Ñis thought to lower the chance of devel-
oping certain forms of heart disease. Once consumed,dietary fat is hydrolyzed in the

intestine,regenerating glycerol and fatty acids. We have seen that the hydrolysis of fats

under basic conditions forms glycerol and salts of fatty acids that are commonly

known as 
soap(Section17.13).
H2PtRCHCHCH
2CHCHCH2CHCHRCH
2CH2CH2CHCHCH2CH2CH2an oila fatglycerolOOOCH2OHCH2OHCHOH
CH2OCH2OCHO
fatty acidsR1COHR3COHR2COHOOOa triacylglycerola fat or an oilCR1CR3CR2This puffinÕs diet is high in fish oil.
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 05
PROBLEM 3Do all triacylglycerols have the same number of asymmetric carbons?
PROBLEM 4Which has a higher melting point,glyceryl tripalmitoleate or glyceryl tripalmitate?
Organisms store energy in the form of triacylglycerols. A fat provides about six
times as much metabolic energy as an equal weight of hydrated glycogen because fats

are less oxidized than carbohydrates and,since fats are nonpolar,they do not bind

water. In contrast,two-thirds of the weight of stored glycogen is water (Section22.18).
Animalshave a subcutaneous layer of fat cells that serves as both an energy source
and an insulator. The fat content of the average man is about 21%,whereas the fat con-

tent of the average woman is about 25%. Humans can store sufficient fat to provide for

the bodyÕs metabolic needs for two to three months,but can store only enough carbo-
hydrate to provide for its metabolic needs for less than 24 hours. Carbohydrates,there-

fore,are used primarily as a quick,short-term energy source.
Polyunsaturated fats and oils are easily oxidized by by means of a radical chain
reaction. In the initiation step,a radical removes a hydrogen from a methylene group

that is flanked by two double bonds. This hydrogen is the most easily removed one
O2006CHAPTER 26Lipids
OLESTRA: NONFAT WITH FLAVOR
Chemists have been searching for ways to reduce
the caloric content of foods without decreasing
their flavor. Many people who believe that 
Òno fat
Óis synony-
mous with Òno flavor
Ócan understand this problem. The federal
Food and Drug Administration (Section30.13) approved the

limited use of Olestra as a substitute for dietary fat in snack

foods. Procter and Gamble spent 30 years and more than $2
billion to develop this compound. Its approval was based on the

results of more than 150 studies.Olestra is a semisynthetic compound. That is,Olestra does
not exist in nature,but its components do. Developing a com-

pound that can be made from units that are a normal part of our

diet decreases the potential toxic effects of the new compound.

Olestra is made by esterifying all the OH groups of sucrose

with fatty acids obtained from cottonseed oil and soybean oil.

Therefore,its component parts are table sugar and vegetable
oil. Olestra works as a fat substitute because its ester linkages
are too hindered to be hydrolyzed by digestive enzymes. As a

result,Olestra tastes like fat,but it has no caloric value since it

cannot be digested.COCOCOOCCOCH2CH2OCCH2OOO21OCOOOOOOOOCOolestra3-D Molecule:OlestraBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 06
because the resulting radical is resonance stabilized by both double bonds. This radical
reacts with forming a peroxy radical with conjugated double bonds. The peroxy

radical removes a hydrogen from a methylene group of another molecule of fatty acid,

forming an alkyl hydroperoxide. The two propagating steps are repeated over and over.
The reaction of fatty acids with causes them to become rancid. The unpleasant
taste and smell associated with rancidity are the results of further oxidation of the alkyl

hydroperoxide to shorter chain carboxylic acids such as butyric acid that have strong

odors. The same process contributes to the odor associated with sour milk.
PROBLEM 5Draw the resonance contributors for the radical formed when a hydrogen atom is removed
from C-10 of arachidonic acid.O2O2,Section 26.3Fats and Oils
007resonance contributor with isolated double bondsresonance contributor with 
conjugated double bondsinitiationpropagationpropagationa peroxy radicalRCHCHCH
HCHCHX
RCHCHCH
CHCHHX
RCHCHCH
OOCHCHRCHCHCH
2CHCHRCHCHCH
CHCHOOan alkyl hydroperoxideRCHCHCH
CHCHRCHCHCH
CHCHOOH
WHALES AND ECHOLOCATION
Whales have enormous heads,accounting for 33%
of their total weight. They have large deposits of
fat in their heads and lower jaws. This fat is very different from

both the whaleÕs normal body fat and its dietary fat.Because
major anatomical modifications were necessary to accommo-

date this fat,it must have some important function for the

animal. It is now believed that the fat is used for echolocation
Ñemitting sounds in pulses and gaining information by analyzing

the returning echoes. The fat in the whale
Õs head focuses theemitted sound waves in a directional beam,and the echoes are

received by the fat organ in the lower jaw. This organ transmits

the sound to the brain for processing and interpretation,provid-

ing the whale with information about the depth of the water,

changes in the seafloor,and the position of the coastline. The

fat deposits in the whale
Õs head and jaw therefore give the ani-
mal a unique acoustic sensory system and allow it to compete

successfully for survival with the shark,which also has a well-

developed sense of sound direction.
Humpback whale in AlaskaBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 07
phosphatidylserine008CHAPTER 26Lipids
26.4MembranesFor biological systems to operate,some parts of organisms must be separated from
other parts. On a cellular level,the outside of the cell must be separated from the in-

side. ÒGreasyÓlipid membranesserve as the barrier. In addition to isolating the cell
Õscontents,these membranes allow the selective transport of ions and organic molecules

into and out of the cell.PhospholipidsPhosphoacylglycerols
(also called phosphoglycerides) are the major componentsof cell membranes. They are similar to triacylglycerols except that a terminal OH

group of glycerol is esterified with phosphoric acid rather than with a fatty acid,

forming a phosphatidic acid. Because phosphoacylglycerols are lipids that contain
a phosphate group,they are classified as 
phospholipids. The C-2 carbon of glycerol
in phosphoacylglycerols has the 
Rconfiguration.
Phosphatidic acids are the simplest phosphoacylglycerols and are present only in
small amounts in membranes. The most common phosphoacylglycerols in membranes

have a second phosphate ester linkage. The alcohols most commonly used to form this

second ester group are ethanolamine,choline,and serine. Phosphatidylethanolamines

are also called cephalins,and phosphatidylcholines are called 
lecithins. Used asemulsifying agents,lecithins are added to foods such as mayonnaise to prevent the

aqueous and fat components from separating.
Phosphoacylglycerolsform membranes by arranging themselves in a 
lipid bilayer
.The polar heads of the phosphoacylglycerols are on the outside of the bilayer,and the

fatty acid chains form the interior of the bilayer. Cholesterol
Ña membrane lipid dis-cussed in Section26.9
Ñis also found in the interior of the bilayer (Figure26.1). A
typical bilayer is about 50† thick. [Compare the bilayer with the micelles formed by
soap in aqueous solution (Section17.13).]
CH2OCH2OOCHO
OOOR configurationCR1POH
CR2a phosphatidic acid3-D Molecule:Phosphatidic acidCH2OCH2OOCHO
OOOa phosphatidylethanolaminea cephalinCR1POCH2CH2NH3CR2CH2OCH2CH3CH3OOCHO
OOOa phosphatidylcholinea lecithinCR1POCH2CH2NCH3CR2CH2OCH2NH3OOCHO
OOOa phosphatidylserineCR1POCH2CHCOOCR2BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 08
Section 26.4Membranes
009polarheadCH2OR1R2COCCHOnonpolarfatty acid
chainsOOPCH2OOO(CH2)2NH3cholesterolmoleculeenlargement of a
phosphoacylglycerolFigure 26.1
A lipid bilayer.
IS CHOCOLATE A HEALTH FOOD?
We have long been told that our diets should in-
clude lots of fruits and vegetables because they are
good sources of antioxidants. Antioxidants protect against car-

diovascular disease,cancer,and cataracts,and they slow the ef-

fects of aging. Recent studies show that chocolate has high levels

of antioxidantsÑcomplex mixtures of phenolic compounds
(Section9.8). On a weight basis,the concentration of antioxi-

dants in chocolate is higher than the concentration in red wine or
green tea and 20 times higher than the concentration in tomatoes.
Dark chocolate contains more than twice the level of antioxi-

dants as milk chocolate. Unfortunately,white chocolate contains

no antioxidants. Another piece of good news is that stearic acid,

the main fatty acid in chocolate,does not appear to raise blood

cholesterol levels the way other saturated fatty acids do.
The fluidity of a membrane is controlled by the fatty acid components of the phos-
phoacylglycerols. Saturated fatty acids decrease membrane fluidity because their

hydrocarbon chains can pack closely together. Unsaturated fatty acids increase fluidity

because they pack less closely together. Cholesterol also decreases fluidity (Sec-

tion26.9). Only animal membranes contain cholesterol,so they are more rigid than

plant membranes.Theunsaturated fatty acid chains of phosphoacylglycerols are susceptible to reac-
tion with similar to the reaction described on p.7 for fats and oils. Oxidation of

phosphoacylglycerols can lead to the degradation of membranes. Vitamin E is an im-

portant antioxidant that protects fatty acid chains from degradation via oxidation. Vit-

amin E,also called is classified as a lipid because it is soluble in

nonpolar organic solvents. Because vitamin E reacts more rapidly with oxygen than

triacylglycerols do,the vitamin prevents biological membranes from reacting with

oxygen (Section9.8). There are some who believe that vitamin E slows the aging

process. Because vitamin E also reacts with oxygen more rapidly than fats do,it is

added to many foods to prevent spoilage.
   -tocopherol
vitamin ECH3CH3H3CHOOa-tocopherol,O2,3-D Molecule:Vitamin E
AU:Sentence above is not definite,
whereas sentence in box

is quite definite.Want to be consistent?
Pg number to be fixed
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 09
PROBLEM 8a.Draw the structures of three different sphingomyelins.
b.Draw the structure of a galactocerebroside.
PROBLEM 9The membrane phospholipids in animals such as deer and elk have a higher degree of un-
saturation in cells closer to the hoof than in cells closer to the body. Explain how this trait

can be important for survival.
010CHAPTER 26Lipids
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
AND THE MYELIN SHEATH
The myelin sheath is a lipid-rich material that iswrapped around the axons of nerve cells. Composed largely of

sphingomyelins and cerebrosides,the sheath functions so as to
increase the velocity of nerve impulses. Multiple sclerosis is a
disease characterized by loss of the myelin sheath,a consequent

slowing of nerve impulses,and eventual paralysis.
PROBLEM 6Membranes contain proteins. Integral membrane proteins extend partly or completely

through the membrane,whereas peripheral membrane proteins are found on the inner or

outer surfaces of the membrane. What is the likely difference in the overall amino acid

composition of integral and peripheral membrane proteins?
PROBLEM 7A colony of bacteria accustomed to an environment at 25
¡C was moved to an identical en-
vironment,at 35
¡C. The higher temperature increased the fluidity of the bacterial mem-
branes. What could the bacteria do to regain their original membrane fluidity?
SphingolipidsSphingolipidsare also found in membranes. They are the major lipid components in
the myelin sheaths of nerve fibers. Sphingolipids contain sphingosine instead of glyc-

erol. In sphingolipids,the amino group of sphingosine is bonded to the acyl group of

a fatty acid. Both asymmetric carbons in sphingosine have the 
Sconfiguration.
Twoof the most common kinds of sphingolipids are 
sphingomyelins
andcerebrosides
. In sphingomyelins,the primary OH group of sphingosine is bonded
to phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine,similar to the bonding in lecithins and

cephalins. In cerebrosides,the primary OH group of sphingosine is bonded to a

sugar residue through a linkage (Section 22.13). Sphingomyelins are

phospholipids because they contain a phosphate group. Cerebrosides,on the other

hand,are not phospholipids.
a sphingomyelina glucocerebrosideCHCHOH
CH(CH2)12CH3CH2OPOCH2CH2NCH3CHNH
COOOCH3CH3RCHCHOH
CH(CH2)12CH3CH2OCHNH
CORHOHOCH2OHHHHOHHHOb-glycosidic3-D Molecule:SphingosinesphingosineCHCHOH
CH(CH2)12CH3CH2OHCHNH
2s configurationBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 010
Ulf Svante von Euler (1905
Ð1983)first identified prostaglandinsÑfrom

semenÑin the early 1930s. He
named them for their source,the

prostate gland. By the time it was

realized that all cells except red

blood cells synthesize prostaglandins,

their name had become entrenched.

Von Euler was born in Stockholm and

received an M.D. from the Karolinska

Institute,where he remained as a

member of the faculty. He discovered

noradrenaline and identified its

function as a chemical intermediate

in nerve transmission. For this work,

he shared the 1970 Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine with Julius

Axelrod and Sir Bernard Katz.
Section 26.5Prostaglandins
01126.5Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins
are found in all body tissues and are responsible for regulating a vari-
ety of physiological responses,such as inflammation,blood pressure,blood clotting,

fever,pain,the induction of labor,and the sleep
Ðwake cycle. All prostaglandins have
a five-membered ring with a seven-carbon carboxylic acid substituent and an eight-

carbon hydrocarbon substituent. The two substituents are trans to each other.
Prostaglandins are named in accordance with the format PGX,where X designates
the functional groups of the five-membered ring. PGAs,PGBs,and PGCs all contain a

carbonyl group and a double bond in the five-membered ring. The location of the dou-

ble bond determines whether a prostaglandin is a PGA,PGB,or PGC. PGDs and

PGEs are ketones,and PGFs are 1,3-diols. A subscript indicates the total

number of double bonds in the side chains,and and indicate the configuration

of the two OH groups in a PGF:indicates a cis diol and indicates a tran
sdiol.Prostaglandins are synthesized from arachidonic acid,a 20-carbon fatty acid with four
cis double bonds. In the cell,arachidonic acid is found esterified to the 2-position of

glycerol in many phospholipids. Arachidonic acid is synthesized from linoleic acid.

Because linoleic acid cannot be synthesized by mammals,it must be included in the diet.
An enzyme called prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase catalyzes the conversion of
arachidonic acid to the precursor of all prostaglandins. There are two forms of

this enzyme; one carries out the normal physiological production of prostaglandin,
and the other synthesizes additional prostaglandin in response to inflammation. The

enzyme has two activities:a cyclooxygenase activity and a hydroperoxidase activity. It

uses its cyclooxygenase activity to form the five-membered ring. In the first step of

this transformation,a hydrogen atom is removed from a carbon flanked by two double

bonds. This hydrogen is removed relatively easily because the resulting radical is
PGH2,HOPGF2HOHCOOHHOHPGE1OOHCOOHHHOOHPGE2HCOOHHHOOHOR1R2HR1HR1HHOR1R2OR2HOOR2HPGAsPGBsPGCsPGDs
ÒbÓÒaÓÒbÓÒaÓb-hydroxyprostaglandin skeletonCOOHHHFor their work on prostaglandins,
Sune Bergstr
ım,Bengt IngemarSamuelsson,and 
John Robert Vane
shared the 1982 Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine. Bergstrım

and Samuelsson were born in

SwedenÑBergstrım in 1916 and

Samuelsson in 1934. They are both at

the Karolinska Institute. Vane was

born in England in 1927 and is at the
Wellcome Foundation in Beckenham,

England.BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 011
012CHAPTER 26Lipids
stabilized by electron delocalization. The radical reacts with oxygen to form a peroxy
radical. Notice that these two steps are the same as the first two steps in the reaction

that causes fats to become rancid (Section26.3). The peroxy radical rearranges and re-

acts with a second molecule of oxygen. The enzyme then uses its hydroperoxidase ac-

tivity to convert the OOH group into an OH group,forming which rearranges

to form a prostaglandin.
In addition to serving as a precursor for the synthesis of prostaglandins,is a
precursor for the synthesis of thromboxanes
and prostacyclins
. Thromboxanes con-
strict blood vessels and stimulate the aggregation of platelets,the first step in blood

clotting. Prostacyclins have the opposite effect,dilating blood vessels and inhibiting
PGH2PGE2,PGH2,COOHarachidonic acidHHCOOHHOOCOOHCOOHOOOOHOHOOCOOHHOOOHCOOHCOOHOHOHCOOHOHOHOOHOOHHOHHHHHHHHHHOOcyclooxygenasebiosynthesis of prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and prostacyclinsa peroxy radicalhydroperoxidaseseveralstepsseveralstepsPGH2a thromboxanePGE2a prostaglandina prostacyclinBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 012
Section 26.5Prostaglandins
013the aggregation of platelets. The levels of these two compounds must be carefully con-
trolled to maintain the proper balance in the blood.Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) inhibits the cyclooxygenase activity of prostaglandin
endoperoxide synthase. It does this by transferring an acetyl group to a serine hydrox-

yl group of the enzyme (Section17.10). Aspirin,therefore,inhibits the synthesis of

prostaglandins and,in that way,decreases the inflammation produced by these com-

pounds. Aspirin also inhibits the synthesis of thromboxanes and prostacyclins. Over-

all,this causes a slight decrease in the rate of blood clotting,which is why some

doctors recommend one aspirin tablet every other day to reduce the chance of a heart

attack or stroke caused by clotting in blood vessels.
Other anti-inflammatory drugs,such as ibuprofen (the active ingredient in 
and ) and naproxen (the active ingredient in ),also inhibit
the synthesis of prostaglandins. They compete with either arachidonic acid or the

peroxy radical for the enzymeÕs binding site.Both aspirin and these other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibitthe synthesis of all prostaglandinsÑthose produced under normal physiological condi-tions and those produced in response to inflammation. The production of acid in the

stomach is regulated by a prostaglandin. When prostaglandin synthesis stops,therefore,

the acidity of the stomach can rise above normal levels. New drugs
ÑandÑthat recently have become available inhibit only the enzyme that produces
prostaglandin in response to stress. Thus,inflammatory conditions now can be treated

without some of the harmful side effects.
VioxxCH3OOOOSCelebrexCH3F3CCH3ONNOSVioxx¨Celebrex¨Aleve¨Nuprin¨Motrin¨,Advil¨,OCH3CHOCH
2HOHOOCacetylsalicylic acidaspirincyclooxygenaseactive enzymeserine hydroxylgroupacetyl
groupcyclooxygenaseinactive enzymeOOCH2CH3COHOOCCOOHOCCH3OaspirinCHCOOHCH3CHCH2CH3CH3CHCOOHCH3CH3OibuprofennaproxenBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 013
Leopold Stephen Ruika
(1887Ð1976)was the first to
recognize that many organic

compounds contain multiples of five

carbons. A Croatian,Ruika

attended college in Switzerland 

and became a Swiss citizen in 1917.
He was a professor of chemistry at

the University of Utrecht in the

Netherlands and later at the Federal

Institute of Technoloh.

For his work on terpenes,he shared

the 1939 Nobel Prize in chemistry

with Adolph Butenandt (p.25).
czcz014CHAPTER 26Lipids
Arachidonic acid can also be converted into a 
leukotriene
. Because they induce
contraction of the muscle that lines the airways to the lungs,leukotrienes are implicat-

ed in allergic reactions,inflammatory reactions,and heart attacks. Leukotrienes also

bring on the symptoms of asthma and are implicated in anaphylactic shock,a poten-

tially fatal allergic reaction. There are several antileukotriene agents available for the

treatment of asthma.PROBLEM 10Treating with a strong base such as sodium 
tert-butoxide followed by addition of
acid converts it to Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
26.6Terpenes
Terpenes
are a diverse class of lipids. More than 20,000 terpenes are known. They
can be hydrocarbons,or they can contain oxygen and be alcohols,ketones,or

aldehydes. Oxygen-containing terpenes are sometimes called terpenoids
. Certainterpenes and terpenoids have been used as spices,perfumes,and medicines for many

thousands of years.After analyzing a large number of terpenes,organic chemists realized that they
contained carbon atoms in multiples of 5. These naturally occurring compounds con-

tain 10,15,20,25,30,and 40 carbon atoms,which suggests that there is a compound

with five carbon atoms that serves as their building block. Further investigation

showed that their structures are consistent with the assumption that they were made by

joining together isoprene units,usually in a head-to-tail fashion. (The branched end of

isoprene is called the head,and the unbranched end is called the tail.) Isoprene is the

common name for 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene,a compound containing five carbon atoms.
That isoprene units are linked in a head-to-tail fashion to form terpenes is known as
the isoprene rule
.headtailtailcarbon skeleton of two isoprene units with a bondbetween the tail of one and the head of anotherheadOHHOmentholpeppermint oilgeraniolgeranium oilzingibereneoil of ginger  -selineneoil of celeryPGC2.PGA2OHOHarachidonic acida leukotriene
COOHCOOH
Pg number to be fixed
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 014
Section 26.6Terpenes
015In the case of cyclic compounds,the linkage of the head of one isoprene unit to the tail
of another is followed by an additional linkage to form the ring. The second linkage is

not necessarily head-to-tail,but is whatever is necessary to form a stable five-or six-

membered ring.In Section26.8,we will see that the compound actually used in the biosynthesis of
terpenes is not isoprene,but isopentenyl pyrophosphate,a compound that has the same

carbon skeleton as isoprene. We will also look at the mechanism by which isopentenyl

pyrophosphate units are joined together in a head-to-tail fashion.
Terpenes are classified according to the number of carbons they contain (Table26.3).
Monoterpenes
are composed of two isoprene units,so they have 10 carbons.
Sesquiterpenes
,with 15 carbons,are composed of three isoprene units. Many fra-
grances and flavorings found in plants are monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes. These

compounds are known as 
essential oils.headtailOOcarvonespearmint oila monoterpeneheadtail   -farnesene
a sesquiterpene found in thewaxy coating on apple skinsheadtailTable 26.3Classification of Terpenes
Carbon atomsClassificationCarbon atomsClassification
10monoterpenes25sesterterpenes
15sesquiterpenes30triterpenes

20diterpenes40tetraterpenes
Triterpenes
(six isoprene units) and tetraterpenes
(eight isoprene units) have im-
portant biological roles. For example,
squalene,a triterpene,is a precursor of steroid
molecules (Section26.9).
Carotenoids
are tetraterpenes. Lycopene,the compound responsible for the red col-
oring of tomatoes and watermelon,and the compound that causes carrots

and apricots to be orange,are examples of carotenoids. is also the coloring
b-Caroteneb-carotene,squaleneBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 015
agent used in margarine. and other colored compounds are found in the
leaves of trees,but their characteristic colors are usually obscured by the green color of

chlorophyll. In the fall,when chlorophyll degrades,the colors become apparent. The

many conjugated double bonds in lycopene and cause the compounds to be

colored (Section8.13).
PROBLEM 11SOLVED
Mark off the isoprene units in menthol,zingiberene,and squalene.
SOLUTIONFor zingiberene,we have
PROBLEM 12One of the linkages in squalene is tail-to-tail,not head-to-tail. What does this suggest
about how squalene is synthesized in nature? (
Hint:Locate the position of the tail-to-tail
linkage.)PROBLEM 13Mark off the isoprene units in lycopene and Can you detect a similarity in the

way in which squalene,lycopene,and are biosynthesized?
26.7Vitamin A
Vitamins A,D,E,and K are lipids (Sections25.9and 29.6). Vitamin A is the only
water-insoluble vitamin we have not already discussed. which is cleaved

to form two molecules of vitamin A,is the major dietary source of the vitamin. Vita-

min A,also called retinol,plays an important role in vision.
The retina of the eye contains cone cells and rod cells. The cone cells are responsi-
ble for color vision and for vision in bright light. The rod cells are responsible for vi-

sion in dim light. In rod cells,vitamin A is oxidized to an aldehyde and the trans

double bond at C-11 is isomerized to a cis double bond. The mechanism for the en-

zyme-catalyzed interconversion of cis and trans double bonds is discussed in

Section18.15. The protein 
opsinuses a lysine side chain (Lys 216) to form an imine
with (11Z)-retinal,resulting in a complex known as 
rhodopsin.When rhodopsin
b-Carotene,b-caroteneb-carotene.b-selinene,  -carotene
lycopeneb-caroteneb-Carotene016CHAPTER 26Lipids
Tutorial:
Isoprene units in terpenesBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 016
Section 26.8Biosynthesis of Terpenes
017absorbs visible light,it isomerizes to the trans isomer. This change in molecular geom-
etry causes an electrical signal to be sent to the brain,where it is perceived as a visual

image. The trans isomer of rhodopsin is not stable and is hydrolyzed to (11
E)-retinaland opsin in a reaction referred to as bleaching of the visual pigment. (11E)-Retinal isthen converted back to (11
Z)-retinal to complete the vision cycle.
The details of how the foregoing sequence of reactions creates a visual image are
not clearly understood. The fact that a simple change in configuration can be responsi-

ble for initiating a process as complicated as vision,though,is remarkable.
26.8Biosynthesis of Terpenes
Biosynthesis of Isopentenyl Pyrophosphate
The five-carbon compound used for the biosynthesis of terpenes is 3-methyl-
3-butenylpyrophosphate,loosely called isopentenyl pyrophosphate by biochemists.

Each step in its biosynthesis is catalyzed by a different enzyme. The first step is the

same Claisen condensation that occurs in the first step of the biosynthesis of fatty

acids,except that the acetyl and malonyl groups remain attached to coenzyme A rather

than being transferred to the acyl carrier protein (Section19.21). The Claisen conden-

sation is followed by an aldol addition with a second molecule of malonyl-CoA. The

resulting thioester is reduced with two equivalents of NADPH to form mevalonic acid

(Section25.2). A pyrophosphate group is added by means of two successive phospho-

rylations with ATP. Decarboxylation and loss of the OH group result in isopentenyl

pyrophosphate.
91011121314111215retinol
vitamin ACH2OHoxidation(isomerization)HO(11Z)-retinal
H2Nopsinthe chemistry of vision1112activated rhodopsinvisible light(isomerization)1112HNH2OHHN1112(11E)-retinal
HO          H2NrhodopsinopsinopsinopsinBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 017
018CHAPTER 26Lipids
The mechanism for converting mevalonic acid into mevalonyl phosphate is essen-
tially an reaction with an adenosyl pyrophosphate leaving group (Section27.3). A

second reaction converts mevalonyl phosphate to mevalonyl pyrophosphate. ATP

is an excellent phosphorylating reagent for nucleophiles because its phosphoanhydride

bonds are easily broken. The reason that phosphoanhydride bonds are so easily broken

is discussed in Section27.4.
SN2SN2OOOOSCoAOOHOOHacetyl-CoAmalonyl-CoAacetoacetyl-CoA
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoAClaisencondensationbiosynthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate1.2.CoASHCO
2H2O2 NADP2 NADPHADPATPmevalonic acidmevalonyl phosphateOOHCOOCO2OHOPOOSCoAOOSCoAOOSCoASCoACOOCOOCoASHCO2ADPADPATPATPOOHOmevalonyl pyrophosphateisopentenyl pyrophosphateOOHOPOOPOOOOOPOOPOOOPOCOOOHOHCOOOOOPOmevalonic acidadenosineATPOOPOOOPOOmevalonyl pyrophosphateOOADPOHOOPOÐOOHOOPOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOPOOOPOadenosineOADPOOPOOOPOadenosineOOPOadenosineCOOCOOHBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 018
Section 26.8Biosynthesis of Terpenes
019PROBLEM 14SOLVED
Give the mechanism for the last step in the biosynthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate,
showing why ATP is required.
SOLUTIONIn the last step of the biosynthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate,elimina-
tion of is accompanied by elimination of an group,which is a strong base and

therefore a poor leaving group. ATP is used to convert the OH group into a phosphate

group,which is easily eliminated because it is a weak base.
PROBLEM 15Give the mechanisms for the Claisen condensation and aldol addition that occur in the first

two steps of the biosynthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate.
Biosynthesis of Dimethylallyl Pyrophosphate
Both isopentenyl pyrophosphate
and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
are needed forthe biosynthesis of terpenes. Therefore,some isopentenyl pyrophosphate is converted

to dimethylallyl pyrophosphate by an enzyme-catalyzed isomerization reaction. The

isomerization involves addition of a proton to the carbon of isopentenyl py-

rophosphate that is bonded to the greater number of hydrogens (Section4.4) and elim-

ination of a proton from the carbocation intermediate in accordance with Zaitsev
Õsrule (Section11.2).
sp2COADPOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOCO2POHOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOadenosineOHOHCOOATPOOOPOOOPOOOPOOOPOOOPOadenosineO OHCO2AU:Add
here?H?isopentenyl pyrophosphatedimethylallyl pyrophosphate
OOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOHPOOOOPOOOPOHBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 019
020CHAPTER 26Lipids
Terpene Biosynthesis
The reaction of dimethylallyl pyrophosphate with isopentenyl pyrophosphate forms
geranyl pyrophosphate,a 10-carbon compound. In the first step of the reaction,

isopentenyl pyrophosphate acts as a nucleophile and displaces a pyrophosphate group

from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate. Pyrophosphate is an excellent leaving group:Its

four OH groups have values of 0.9,2.0,6.6,and 9.4. Therefore,three of the four

groups will be primarily in their basic forms at physiological pH A pro-

ton is removed in the next step,resulting in the formation of geranyl pyrophosphate.
The following scheme shows how some of the many monoterpenes could be syn-
thesized from geranyl pyrophosphate:
pH7.3.padimethylallyl pyrophosphategeranyl pyrophosphatepyrophosphateisopentenyl pyrophosphateOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPO HOOOPOOOPOgeranyl pyrophosphate  -terpineolin juniper oilOOgeraniolin rose andgeranium oilsOHcitronellolin rose andgeranium oilsmentholin peppermint oilOHcitronellalin lemon oilCHOOPOOOPOH2OHH2OH2OOHOH
OOHreductionreductionoxidationoxidationOHterpin hydratea common constituentof cough medicinelimonenein orange andlemon oilsBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 020
Section 26.8Biosynthesis of Terpenes
021PROBLEM 16Propose a mechanism for the conversion of the 
Eisomer of geranyl pyrophosphate to the 
Zisomer.
PROBLEM 17Propose mechanisms for the formation of and limonene from geranyl

pyrophosphate.
Geranyl pyrophosphate can react with another molecule of isopentenyl pyrophos-
phate to form farnesyl pyrophosphate,a 15-carbon compound.
Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate form squalene,a 30-carbon compound.
The reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme squalene synthase,which joins the two mole-

cules in a tail-to-tail linkage. Squalene is the precursor of cholesterol,and cholesterol

is the precursor of all other steroids.geranyl pyrophosphateisopentenyl pyrophosphatefarnesyl pyrophosphateOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOHOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOa-terpineolE isomerZ isomerOOOO
PPOOOOOOO
PPOOOBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 021
Farnesyl pyrophosphate can react with another molecule of isopentenyl pyrophos-
phate to form geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate,a 20-carbon compound. Two geranylger-

anyl pyrophosphates can join to form phytoene,a 40-carbon compound. Phytoene is

the precursor of the carotenoid (tetraterpene) pigments in plants.PROBLEM 18In aqueous acidic solution,farnesyl pyrophosphate forms the following sesquiterpene:
Propose a mechanism for this reaction.PROBLEM 19SOLVED
If squalene were synthesized in a medium containing acetate whose carbonyl carbon were
labeled with radioactive which carbons in squalene would be labeled?
SOLUTIONAcetate reacts with ATP to form acetyl adenylate,which then reacts with
CoASH to form acetyl-CoA (Section17.20). Because malonyl-CoA is prepared from

acetyl-CoA,the thioester carbonyl carbon of malonyl-CoA will also be labeled. Examin-

ing each step of the mechanism for the biosynthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate from

acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA allows you to determine the locations of the radioactively

labeled carbons in isopentenyl pyrophosphate. Similarly,the locations of the radioac-

tively labeled carbons in geranyl pyrophosphate can be determined from the mechanism

for its biosynthesis from isopentenyl pyrophosphate. And the locations of the radioac-

tively labeled carbons in farnesyl pyrophosphate can be determined from the mechanism

for its biosynthesis from geranyl pyrophosphate. Knowing that squalene is obtained

from a tail-to-tail linkage of two farnesyl pyrophosphates tells you which carbons in

squalene will be labeled. 14C,022CHAPTER 26Lipids
OAMPOSCoAOSCoAOOSCoACoASHOOOadenosine pyrophosphatePOOOOPOOOPOOadenosineOPOCH3OCCH3OCacetyl-CoAacetyl-CoAmalonyl-CoA
141414
1414farnesyl pyrophosphatetail to tailOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOsqualene synthasefarnesyl pyrophosphatesqualene+BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 022
Section 26.9Steroids
02326.9Steroids
Hormonesare chemical messengersÑorganic compounds synthesized in glands and
delivered by the bloodstream to target tissues in order to stimulate or inhibit some

process. Many hormones are 
steroids
. Because steroids are nonpolar compounds,they
are lipids. Their nonpolar character allows them to cross cell membranes,so they can

leave the cells in which they are synthesized and enter their target cells.
All steroids contain a tetracyclic ring system. The four rings are designated A,B,
C,and D. A,B,and C are six-membered rings and D is a five-membered ring. The

carbons in the steroid ring system are numbered as shown.
We have seen that rings can be 
trans fusedor cis fusedand that trans fused ringsare more stable (Section2.15). In steroids,the B,C,and D rings are all trans fused. In

most naturally occurring steroids,the A and B rings are also trans fused.
2. H2O3. NADPH4. ATP
5. ATP
OOSCoAOOSCoAOHCOOOOPOOOPOOO1. mevalonyl pyrophosphate
acetoacetyl-CoA141414141414OOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPO1414141414141414141414141414141414141414141414141414isopentenyl pyrophosphate
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
geranyl pyrophosphate
squalenefarnesyl pyrophosphate
CH3 and Hare transHRH3CH3CCH3 and Hare cisangular methylgroupsHHHHRH3CH3CHHHHHthe steroid ring systemABC1451062378141312119151716DBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 023
024CHAPTER 26Lipids
Two German chemists,
HeinrichOtto Wieland (1877
Ð1957)andAdolf Windaus (1876
Ð1959),each
received a Nobel Prize in chemistry

(Wieland in 1927 and Windaus 

in 1928) for work that led to the
determination of the structure of

cholesterol.
Heinrich Wieland
,the son of a
chemist,was a professor at the

University of Munich,where he

showed that bile acids were steroids

and determined their individual
structures. During World War II,he

remained in Germany but was openly

anti-Nazi.Many steroids have methyl groups at the 10-and 13-positions. These are called
angular methyl groups
. When steroids are drawn,both angular methyl groups are
shown to be above the plane of the steroid ring system. Substituents on the same side

of the steroid ring system as the angular methyl groups are designated 

(indicated by a solid wedge). Those on the opposite side of the plane of the ring

system are (indicated by a hatched wedge).
PROBLEM 20A at C-5 means that the A and B rings are _____ fused; an at C-5
means that they are _____ fused.
The most abundant member of the steroid family in animals is 
cholesterol
,the pre-
cursor of all other steroids. Cholesterol is biosynthesized from squalene,a triterpene

(Section26.6). Cholesterol is an important component of cell membranes

(Figure26.1). Its ring structure makes it more rigid than other membrane lipids. Be-

cause cholesterol has eight asymmetric carbons,256 stereoisomers are possible,but

only one exists in nature (Chapter5,Problem20).
The steroid hormones can be divided into five classes:glucocorticoids,mineralo-
corticoids,androgens,estrogens,and progestins. Glucocorticoids and mineralocorti-

coids are synthesized in the adrenal cortex and are collectively known as 
adrenal
cortical steroids
. All adrenal cortical steroids have an oxygen at C-11.
Glucocorticoids,as their name suggests,are involved in glucose metabolism,as
well as in the metabolism of proteins and fatty acids. Cortisone is an example of a

glucocorticoid. Because of its anti-inflammatory effect,it is used clinically to treat

arthritis and other inflammatory conditions.Mineralocorticoids cause increased reabsorption of and by the
kidneys,leading to an increase in blood pressure. Aldosterone is an example of a

mineralocorticoid.HCO3 Na, Cl,HHHHHHCOH3CHHOCH3CH2OHOH3CCOOHCH2OHCOOOaldosteronecortisoneH3CH3CHHHHOcholesterola-hydrogenb-hydrogenA-substituentsB-substituentsAdolf Windaus
originally intendedto be a physician,but the experience

of working with Emil Fischer for a

year changed his mind. He

discovered that vitamin D was a

steroid,and he was the first to

recognize that vitamin contained

sulfur.
1HHHRHRHCH3CH3A and B rings are trans fusedCH3CH3HA and B rings are cis fusedCH3 and Hare transCH3 and Hare cisBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 024
Section 26.9Steroids
025Adolf Friedrich Johann Butenandt
(1903Ð1995)was born in Germany.
He shared the 1939 Nobel Prize in

chemistry (with Ruika; see p. 14)

for isolating and determining the
structures of estrone,androsterone,

and progesterone. Forced by the Nazi

government to refuse the prize,he

accepted it after World War II. He

was the director of the Kaiser

Wilhelm Institute in Berlin and later

was a professor at the Universities of

Tbingen and Munich.
PROBLEM 21Is the OH substituent of the A ring of cholesterol an or a 
PROBLEM 22Aldosterone is in equilibrium with its cyclic hemiacetal. Draw the hemiacetal form of
aldosterone.The male sex hormones,known as 
androgens
,are secreted by the testes. They are
responsible for the development of male secondary sex characteristics during puberty.

They also promote muscle growth. Testosterone and are

androgens.Estradiol and estrone are female sex hormones known as 
estrogens
. They are se-
creted by the ovaries and are responsible for the development of female secondary sex

characteristics. They also regulate the menstrual cycle. Progesterone is the hormone

that prepares the lining of the uterus for implantation of an ovum and is essential for

the maintenance of pregnancy. It also prevents ovulation during pregnancy.
Although the various steroid hormones have remarkably different physiological ef-
fects,their structures are quite similar. For example,the only difference between

testosterone and progesterone is the substituent at C-17,and the only difference be-

tween and estradiol is one carbon and six hydrogens,but these

compounds make the difference between being male and being female. These exam-

ples illustrate the extreme specificity of biochemical reactions.
PROBLEM 23The acid component of a cholesterol ester is a fatty acid such as linoleic acid. Draw the
structure of a cholesterol ester.
In addition to being the precursor of all the steroid hormones in animals,cholesterol
is the precursor of the bile acids. In fact,the word 
cholesterol
is derived from the
Greek words 
chole
meaning ÒbileÓand stereos
meaning Òsolid.ÓThe bile acidsÑcholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acidÑare synthesized in the liver,stored in the gall-
bladder,and secreted into the small intestine,where they act as emulsifying agents so

that fats and oils can be digested by water-soluble digestive enzymes. Cholesterol is

also the precursor of vitamin D (Section29.6).
5a-dihydrotestosteroneHHHHHHH3CCH3HOHCOCH3OCH3OHCH3HOHOHestroneprogesteroneestradiolHHHHCH3OH3COH5   -dihydrotestosterone
HHHCH3OH3COHtestosterone5a-dihydrotestosteroneb-substituent?a-substituentMichael S. Brown
and Joseph
Leonard Goldsteinshared the 1985
Nobel Prize in physiology or

medicine for their work on the
regulation of cholesterol metabolism

and the treatment of disease caused

by elevated cholesterol levels in the

blood. Brown was born in New York

in 1941; Goldstein,in South Carolina

in 1940. They are both professors of

medicine at the University of Texas

Southwestern Medical Center.
Pg number to be fixed
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 025
026CHAPTER 26Lipids
CHOLESTEROL ANDHEART DISEASE
Cholesterol is probably the best-known lipid be-
cause of the correlation between cholesterol levels in the blood

and heart disease. Cholesterol is synthesized in the liver and is

also found in almost all body tissues. Cholesterol is also found
in many foods,but we do not require it in our diet because the

body can synthesize all we need. A diet high in cholesterol can

lead to high levels of cholesterol in the bloodstream,and the ex-

cess can accumulate on the walls of arteries,restricting the flow

of blood. This disease of the circulatory system is known as

atherosclerosis
and is a primary cause of heart disease. Choles-terol travels through the bloodstream packaged in particles that

also contain cholesterol esters,phospholipids,and proteins. The
particles are classified according to their density. LDL (low-
density lipoprotein) particles transport cholesterol from the liver

to other tissues. Receptors on the surfaces of cells bind LDL par-

ticles,allowing them to be brought into the cell so that it can use

the cholesterol. HDL (high-density lipoprotein) is a cholesterol
scavenger,removing cholesterol from the surfaces of mem-

branes and delivering it back to the liver,where it is converted

into bile acids. LDL is the so-called bad cholesterol,whereas

HDL is the ÒgoodÓcholesterol. The more cholesterol we eat,the
less the body synthesizes. But this does not mean that the pres-
ence of dietary cholesterol has no effect on the total amount of

cholesterol in the bloodstream,because dietary cholesterol also

inhibits the synthesis of the LDL receptors. So the more choles-
terol we eat,the less the body synthesizes,but also,the less the

body can get rid of by bringing it into target cells.
CLINICAL TREATMENT OF
HIGH CHOLESTEROLStatins are the newest class of cholesterol-reduc-
ing drugs. Statins reduce serum cholesterol levels by inhibiting

the enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of hydroxymethylglu-
taryl-CoA to mevalonic acid (Section26.8). Decreasing the

mevalonic acid concentration decreases the isopentenyl py-

rophosphate concentration,so the biosynthesis of all terpenes,

including cholesterol,is diminished. As a consequence of di-

minished cholesterol synthesis in the liver,the liver expresses

more LDL receptorsÑthe receptors that help clear LDL fromthe bloodstream. Studies show that for every 10% that choles-
terol is reduced,deaths from coronary heart disease are reduced
by 15% and total death risk is reduced by 11%.Compactin and lovastatin are natural statins used clinically
under the trade names and Atorvastatin
a synthetic statin,is now the most popular statin.
has greater potency and a longer half-life than natural
statins have,because its metabolites are as active as the parent

drug in reducing cholesterol levels. Therefore,smaller doses of

the drug may be administered. The required dose is reduced

further because is marketed as a single enantiomer. In

addition,it is more lipophilic than compactin and lovastatin,so

it has a greater tendency to remain in the endoplasmic reticu-

lum of the liver cells,where it is needed.
Lipitor¨Lipitor¨(Lipitor)¨,Mevacor¨.Zocor¨(CH3)2CHOHOH
OOOOH3CH3CCH3CH3FH3CH3COHOHOHOCOCNHOOOCH3H3CCH3ONlovastatinsimvastatin
MevacorZocoratorvastatinLipitorPROBLEM 24Are the three OH groups of cholic acid axial or equatorial?CH3HOHOOHCOOHHH3CHHcholic acidHH3CHOOH
COOHHH3CHHchenodeoxycholic acidHTutorial:
SteroidsBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 026
Section 26.10Biosynthesis of Cholesterol
027Konrad Bloch
and Feodor Lynen
shared the 1964 Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine. Bloch

showed how fatty acids and
cholesterol are biosynthesized from

acetate. Lynen showed that the two-

carbon acetate unit is actually acetyl-
CoA,and he determined the structure

of coenzyme A.
Konrad Emil Bloch
(1912Ð2000)was born in Upper Silesia (then a
part of Germany),left Nazi Germany

for Switzerland in 1934,and came to

the United States in 1936,becoming

a U.S. citizen in 1944. He received a

Ph.D. from Columbia in 1938,taught

at the University of Chicago,and

became a professor of biochemistry

at Harvard in 1954.
Feodor Lynen (1911
Ð1979)wasborn in Germany,received a Ph.D.

under Heinrich Wieland,and married

Wieland
Õs daughter. He was head of
the Institute of Cell Chemistry at the
University of Munich.
26.10Biosynthesis of Cholesterol
How is cholesterol,the precursor of all the steroid hormones,biosynthesized? The
starting material for the biosynthesis is the triterpene squalene,which must first be

converted to lanosterol. Lanosterol is converted to cholesterol in a series of 19 steps.
The first step in the conversion of squalene to lanosterol is epoxidation of the
2,3-double bond of squalene. Acid-catalyzed opening of the epoxide initiates a series

of cyclizations resulting in the protosterol cation. Elimination of a C-9 proton from the

cation initiates a series of 1,2-hydride and 1,2-methyl shifts,resulting in lanosterol.
Converting lanosterol to cholesterol requires removing three methyl groups from
lanosterol (in addition to reducing two double bonds and creating a new double bond).

Removing methyl groups from carbon atoms is not easy:Many different enzymes are re-

quired to carry out the 19 steps. So why does nature bother? Why not just use lanosterol

instead of cholesterol? Konrad Bloch answered that question when he found that mem-

branes containing lanosterol instead of cholesterol are much more permeable. Small mol-

ecules are able to pass easily through lanosterol-containing membranes. As each methyl

group is removed from lanosterol,the membrane becomes less and less permeable.
PROBLEM 25Draw the individual 1,2-hydride and 1,2-methyl shifts responsible for conversion of the proto-
sterol cation to lanosterol. How many hydride shifts are involved? How many methyl shifts?
cholesterolHHHHOH3CHH3Cbiosynthesis of lanosterol and cholesterol CH3HHOH3CH3CCH3HHOH3CHHHOsqualeneepoxidaseO2Hlanosterolsqualeneprotosterol cation19 stepssqualene oxideCH3BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 027
028CHAPTER 26Lipids
26.11Synthetic Steroids
The potent physiological effects of steroids led scientists,in their search for new
drugs,to synthesize steroids that are not available in nature and to investigate their

physiological effects. Stanozolol and Dianabol are drugs developed in this way. They

have the same muscle-building effect as testosterone. Steroids that aid in the develop-

ment of muscle are called anabolic steroids
. These drugs are available by prescription
and are used to treat people suffering from traumas accompanied by muscle deteriora-

tion. The same drugs have been administered to athletes and racehorses to increase

their muscle mass. Stanozolol was the drug detected in several athletes in the 1988

Olympics. Anabolic steroids,when taken in relatively high dosages,have been found

to cause liver tumors,personality disorders,and testicular atrophy.
Many synthetic steroids have been found to be much more potent than natural
steroids. Norethindrone,for example,is better than progesterone in arresting ovula-

tion. Another synthetic steroid,RU 486,when taken along with prostaglandins,termi-

nates pregnancy within the first nine weeks of gestation. Notice that these oral

contraceptives have structures similar to that of progesterone.
norethindroneHH3COHRU 486HHH3COOHCCCH
3CH3NCH3HOHCCH
HstanozololH3CH3CHDianabolHHH3COH3COHCH3HHOHCH3HHHNNSummaryLipidsare organic compounds,found in living organisms,
that are soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
Fatty acids
are carboxylic acids with long hydrocarbon chains. Double
bonds in fatty acids have the cis configuration. Fatty acids

with more than one double bond are called polyunsatu-rated fatty acids. Double bonds in naturally occurring un-
saturated fatty acids are separated by one methylene group.

Waxes
are esters formed from long-chain carboxylic acidsand long-chain alcohols. Prostaglandins
are synthesizedfrom arachidonic acid and are responsible for regulating a

variety of physiological responses.
Triacylglycerols
(triglycerides) are compounds in which
the three OH groups of glycerol are esterified with fatty acids.

Triacylglycerols that are solids or semisolids at room temper-
ature are called fats. Liquid triacylglycerols are called 
oils.Some or all of the double bonds of polyunsaturated oils can be
reduced by catalytic hydrogenation. 
Phosphoacylglycerols
differ from triacylglycerols in that the terminal OH group of

glycerol is esterified with phosphoric acid instead of a fatty

acid. Phosphoacylglycerols form membranes by arranging

themselves in a 
lipid bilayer
. Phospholipidsare lipids thatcontain a phosphate group. Sphingolipids,also found in
membranes,contain sphingosine instead of glycerol.
Terpenes
contain carbon atoms in multiples of 5. They
are made by joining together five-carbon isoprene units,

usually in a head-to-tail fashion
Ñthe isoprene rule
.Monoterpenes
Ñterpenes with two isoprene units
Ñhave
10 carbons; sesquiterpenes
have 15. 
Squalene,a 
triterpene
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 028
Problems029Key Terms
adrenal cortical steroids (p.024)
anabolic steroids (p.028)

androgens (p.025)

angular methyl group (p.024)

bile acids (p.025)

carotenoid (p.015)

cephalins (p.008)

cerebroside (p.010)

cholesterol (p.024)

cis fused (p.023)

dymethyl allyl pyrophosphate (p.019)

essential oils (p.015)

estrogens (p.025)

fat (p.005)

fatty acid (p.002

hormone (p.023)

isopentenyl pyrophosphate (p.019)
isoprene rule (p.014)
lecithins (p.008)

lipid (p.001)

lipid bilayer (p.008)

leukotriene (p.014)

membrane (p.008)

mixed triacylglycerol (p.004)

monoterpene (p.015)

oil (p.005)

phosphatidic acid (p.008)

phosphoacylglycerol (p.008)

phosphoglycerides (p.008)

phospholipid (p.008)

polyunsaturated fatty acid (p.002)

prostacyclins (p.012)

prostaglandin (p.011)

sesquiterpene (p.015)
simple triacylglycerol (p.004)
sphingomyelins (p.010)
sphingolipid (p.010)

squalene (p.015)

steroid (p.023)
(p.024)
(p.024)
terpene (p.014)

terpenoid (p.014)

tetraterpene (p.015)

thromboxanes (p.012)

trans fused (p.023)

triacylglycerol (p.004)

triterpene (p.015)

wax (p.004)
b-substituenta-substituent(a terpene with six isoprene units),is a precursor of steroid
molecules. Lycopene and are 
tetraterpenes
called carotenoids
. is cleaved to form two
molecules of vitamin A.
The five-carbon compound used for the synthesis of ter-
penes is isopentenyl pyrophosphate. The reaction of

dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
(formed from isopentenyl
pyrophosphate) with 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate
formsgeranyl pyrophosphate,a 10-carbon compound. Geranyl

pyrophosphate can react with another molecule of isopen-

tenyl pyrophosphate to form farnesyl pyrophosphate,a

15-carbon compound. Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophos-

phate form squalene,a 30-carbon compound. Squalene is
the precursor of cholesterol
. Farnesyl pyrophosphate can
react with another molecule of isopentenyl pyrophosphate

to form geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate,a 20-carbon

compound. Two geranylgeranyl pyrophosphates join to
b-Caroteneb-caroteneform phytoene,a 40-carbon compound. Phytoene is the
precursor of the carotenoids
.Hormonesare chemical messengers. Many hormones
are steroids
. All steroids contain a tetracyclic ring system.
The B,C,and D rings are 
trans fused. In most naturallyoccurring steroids,the A and B rings are also trans fused.

Methyl groups at C-10 and C-13 are called 
angular methyl
groups
. -Substituentsare on the same side of the steroidring system as the angular methyl groups; -
substituentsare on the opposite side. Synthetic steroids are steroids that
are not found in nature.The most abundant member of the steroid family in
animals is cholesterol
,the precursor of all other steroids.
Cholesterol is an important component of cell membranes;
its ring structure causes it to be more rigid than other mem-

brane lipids. In the biosynthesis of cholesterol,squalene is

converted to lanosterol,which is converted to cholesterol.
ABProblems
26.An optically active fat,when completely hydrolyzed,yields twice as much stearic acid as palmitic acid. Draw the structure of
 the fat.
27.a.How many different triacylglycerols are there in which one of the fatty acid components is lauric acid and two are myristi
c acid?b.How many different triacylglycerols are there in which one of the fatty acid components is lauric acid,one is myristic acid,a
ndone is palmitic acid?28.Cardiolipins are found in heart muscles. Give the products formed when a cardiolipin undergoes complete acid-catalyzed hydro
lysis.CH2OCHOCR
2OOCH2CHCH2OOHa cardiolipinOCH2POCHR4COOOOOPOCH2R3COCH2OCR
1OAU:Insert 
boldfaceterms in Key Terms?

(boxed) Or make

lightface in text?
BRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 029
030CHAPTER 26Lipids
29.Nutmeg contains a simple,fully saturated triacylglycerol with a molecular weight of 722. Draw its structure.
30.Give the product that would be obtained from the reaction of cholesterol with each of the following reagents:(
Hint:Because ofsteric hindrance from the angular methyl groups,the is more susceptible to attack by reagents than the .)

a.
b.in THF,followed by 

c.PdC

d.
e.peroxyacetic acid

f.the product of part 
31.Dr. Cole S. Terol synthesized the following samples of mevalonic acid and fed them to a group of lemon trees:
Which carbons in citronellal,which is isolated from lemon oil,will be labeled in trees that were fed the following?
a.sample Ab.sample Bc.sample C
32.An optically active monoterpene (compound A) with molecular formula undergoes catalytic hydrogenation to form an
optically inactive compound with molecular formula (compound B). When compound B is heated with acid,followed by

reaction with and workup under reducing conditions one of the products obtained is 4-methylcyclohexanone. Give

possible structures for compound A.
33.If junipers were allowed to grow in a medium containing acetate in which the methyl carbon was labeled with which carbons
in would be labeled?
34.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
b.To what class of terpene does the starting material belong? Mark off the isoprene units in the starting material.
35.5-Androstene-3,17-dione is isomerized to 4-androstene-3,17-dione by hydroxide ion. Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
5-androstene-3,17-dione
H3CH3COHOH2OO4-androstene-3,17-dione
H3CH3COOCH3CH3CH3CH3H3CH3CHOHCH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CH3OCH3CH3H3CCH3a-terpineol 14C,Zn, H2O,O3,C10H20OC10H18OCH2COCH3CCH2CH2OHOHOsample ACH2COCH3CCH2CH2OHOHOsample BCH2COCH3CCH2CH2OHOHOsample C141414
cholesterolH3CHHHH3CHOeCH3OBr2H2OH2,H2O2HOBH3H2O, Hb-facea-faceBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 030
Problems03136.Both OH groups of one of the following steroid diols react with excess ethyl chloroformate,but only one OH group of the othe
rsteroid diol reacts under the same conditions:Explain the difference in reactivity.
37.The acid-catalyzed dehydration of an alcohol to a rearranged alkene is known as a Wagner
ÐMeerwein rearrangement. Propose amechanism for the following Wagner
ÐMeerwein rearrangement:38.Diethylstilbestrol (DES) was given to pregnant women to prevent miscarriage,until it was found that the drug caused cancer i
nboth the mothers and their female children. DES has estradiol activity even though it is not a steroid. Draw DES in a way that

shows that it is structurally similar to estradiol.
HOOHCH3CH2CH2CH3diethylstilbestrolDESH3OOHisoborneolcampheneHCH3CH2OCOCH3CH2OCClOOOHH3CHOH3C5  -cholestane-3  ,7
HHOH-diolCH3CH2OCOCH3CH2OCClOOOHOCOCH2CH3H3CHOOHH3CH5  -cholestane-3  ,7
-diolBRUI26-1_31r2  24-02-2003  3:27 PM  Page 031
In previous chapters,we studied
two of the three major kinds of

biopolymersÑpolysaccharides andproteins. Now we will look at the

thirdÑnucleic acids. There are two types

of nucleic acidsÑdeoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
and ribonucleic acid (RNA)
. DNA encodes an organismÕs entire hereditary informa-
tion and controls the growth and division of cells. In most organisms,the genetic infor-

mation stored in DNA is transcribed into RNA. This information can then be translated

for the synthesis of all the proteins needed for cellular structure and function.DNA was first isolated in 1869 from the nuclei of white blood cells. Because this
material was found in the nucleus and was acidic,it was called 
nucleic acid. Eventual-
ly,scientists found that the nuclei of all cells contain DNA,but it wasnÕt until 1944

that they realized that nucleic acids are the carriers of genetic information. In 1953,

James Watson and Francis Crick described the three-dimensional structure of DNAÑ

the famed double helix.
27.1Nucleosides and NucleotidesNucleic acidsare chains of five-membered-ring sugars linked by phosphate groups
(Figure27.1). The anomeric carbon of each sugar is bonded to a nitrogen of a hetero-

cyclic compound in a linkage. (Recall from Section22.10that a -linkage

is one in which the substituents at C-1 and C-4 are on the same side of the furanose ring.)

Because the heterocyclic compounds are amines,they are commonly referred to as

bases. In RNA the five-membered-ring sugar is 
D-ribose. In DNA it is 2-deoxy-
D-ribose(D-ribose without an OH group in the 2-position).Phosphoric acid links the sugars in both RNA and DNA. The acid has three
dissociable OH groups with values of 1.9,6.7,and 12.4. Each of the OH groups

can react with an alcohol to form a 
phosphomonoester,a 
phosphodiester,or a
phosphotriester. In nucleic acids the phosphate group is a phosphodiester.pabb-glycosidican RNA catalyst03227Nucleosides, Nucleotides,and Nucleic AcidsStudies that determined the structures
of the nucleic acids and paved the
way for the discovery of the DNA

double helix were carried out by

Phoebus Levene
and elaborated by
Sir Alexander Todd
.Phoebus Aaron Theodor Levene
(1869Ð1940)was born in Russia.When he immigrated to the United

States with his family in 1891,his

Russian name Fishel was changed to

Phoebus. Because his medical school

education had been interrupted,he

returned to Russia to complete his

studies. When he returned to the

United States,he took chemistry

courses at Columbia University.

Deciding to forgo medicine for a

career in chemistry,he went to

Germany to study under Emil
Fischer. He was a professor of

chemistry at the Rockefeller Institute

(now Rockefeller University).
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 032
Section 27.1Nucleosides and Nucleotides
033THE STRUCTURE OF DNA: WATSON, CRICK,
FRANKLIN, AND WILKINSJames D. Watson was born in Chicago in 1928. He graduated from
the University of Chicago at the age of 19 and received a Ph.D. three years later

from Indiana University. In 1951,as a postdoctoral fellow at Cambridge Universi-

ty,Watson worked on determining the three-dimensional structure of DNA.
Francis H. C. Crick was born in Northampton,England,in 1916. Originally
trained as a physicist,Crick was involved in radar research during World War II.

After the war,he entered Cambridge University to study for a Ph.D. in chemistry,

which he received in 1953. He was a graduate student when he carried out his por-

tion of the work that led to the proposal of the double helical structure of DNA.
Rosalind Franklin was born in London in 1920. She graduated from Cambridge
University and in 1942 quit her graduate studies to accept a position as a research

officer in the British Coal Utilisation Research Association. After the war,she stud-

ied X-ray diffraction techniques in Paris. In 1951 she returned to England,accept-

ing a position to develop an X-ray diffraction unit in the biophysics department at

KingÕs College. Her X-ray studies showed that DNA was a helix with phosphate
groups on the outside of the molecule. Franklin died in 1958 without knowing the

significance her work had played in determining the structure of DNA.
Watson and Crick shared the 1962 Nobel Prize in medicine or physiology with
Maurice Wilkins for determining the double helical structure of DNA. Wilkins

contributed X-ray studies that confirmed the double helical structure. Wilkins was

born in New Zealand in 1916 and moved to England six years later with his par-

ents. During World War II he joined other British scientists who were working with

American scientists on the development of the atomic bomb.
RosalindFranklinFrancisCrick and
James
Watson
RNADNAObaseOOOOPOHbaseOOOOPOHbaseOOH
OOOOOOObaseOOOOPbaseOOOOPbaseOa -glycosidic
linkage2-OH groupa phosphodiestera -glycosidic
linkageanomeric
carbonno 2-OH group  Figure 27.1
Nucleic acids consist of a chain of five-membered-ring sugars linked by phosphate groups.Each sugar (D-ribose in RNA, -deoxy-
D-ribose in DNA) is bonded to a heterocyclic aminein a -glycosidic linkage.
b2Alexander R. Todd (1907Ð1997)
was born in Scotland. He received

two Ph.D. degrees,one from Johann

Wolfgang Goethe University in

Frankfurt (1931) and one from

Oxford University (1933). He was a

professor of chemistry at the

University of Edinburgh,at the

University of Manchester,and from

1944 to 1971 at Cambridge

University. He was knighted in 1954

and was made a baron in 1962

(Baron Todd of Trumpington). For his

work on nucleotides,he was awarded

the 1957 Nobel Prize in chemistry.
AU:Please identify by
indicating left or right
AU:ok prime here?
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 033
The vast differences in heredity among species and among members of the same
species are determined by the sequence of the bases in DNA. Surprisingly,there are

only four bases in DNA
Ñtwo are substituted purines (adenine and guanine),and two
are substituted pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine).
RNA also contains only four bases. Three (adenine,guanine,and cytosine) are the
same as those in DNA,but the fourth base in RNA is uracil instead of thymine. Notice

that thymine and uracil differ only by a methyl group
Ñthymine is 5-methyluracil. The
reason DNA contains thymine instead of uracil is explained in Section27.14.
The purines and pyrimidines are bonded to the anomeric carbon of the furanose
ringÑpurines at N-9 and pyrimidines at N-1
Ñin a -glycosidic linkage. A com-
pound containing a base bonded to D-ribose or to 2-deoxy-D-ribose is called anucleoside. In a nucleoside the ring positions of the sugar are indicated by primednumbers to distinguish them from the ring positions of the base. This is why the

sugar component of DNA is referred to as -deoxy-
D-ribose. Notice the difference
in the base names and their corresponding nucleoside names in Table
27.1. For ex-
ample,adenine is the base,whereas adenosine is the nucleoside. Similarly,cyto-

sine is the base,whereas cytidine is the nucleoside,and so forth. Because uracil is

found only in RNA,it is shown attached to 
D-ribose but not to 2-deoxy-
D-ribose;because thymine is found only in DNA,it is shown attached to 2-deoxy-
D-ribosebut not to 
D-ribose.2bphosphoric acidOOHPOHHOOHORHOORROORROa phosphomonoesterOPa phosphodiesterOOHPa phosphotriesterOORP034CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsadenosinenucleosidesNNNNH2OHOHOHOOHNguanosineNNHNNOH2NcytidineNNNH2OOuridineNHNOOHOOHOHOOHOHOOHHOHOpurineNNN123678945NHNH2NH2CH3H2NpyrimidineNN321465NHNOadenineNNNNHOguaninecytosine
ONHHNHN
OuracilONHOthymineNNHNNHnucleoside = base + sugarBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 034
Section 27.1Nucleosides and Nucleotides
035CH3H2N2-deoxyadenosineNN12345NNNH22-deoxyguanosineNNHNNO2-deoxycytidineNNNH2OOthymidineNHNOOHOOHOOHOOHOHOHOHOHO3-D Molecules:Bases; Nucleosides;
NucleotidesTable 27.1The Names of the Bases, the Nucleosides, and the Nucleotides
BaseNucleosideRibonucleotideDeoxyribonucleotide
AdenineAdenosineAdenosine 
GuanineGuanosineGuanosine 

CytosineCytidineCytidine 

ThymineÑThymidineÑThymidine UracilUridine
ÑUridine 5-phosphate5-phosphate5-phosphate2-Deoxycytidine5-phosphate2-Deoxycytidine5-phosphate2-Deoxyguanosine5-phosphate2-Deoxyguanosine5-phosphate2-Deoxyadenosine5-phosphate2-DeoxyadenosinePROBLEM 1In acidic solutions,nucleosides are hydrolyzed to a sugar and a heterocyclic base. Propose
a mechanism for this reaction.A nucleotideis a nucleoside with either the or the -OH group bonded in an
ester linkage to phosphoric acid. The nucleotides of RNA
Ñwhere the sugar isD-riboseÑare more precisely called 
ribonucleotides,whereas the nucleotides of
DNA
Ñwhere the sugar is 2-deoxy-D-riboseÑare called deoxyribonucleotides.Whenphosphoric acid is heated with it loses water,forming a phosphoanhy-
dride called pyrophosphoric acid. Its name comes from 
pyr,the Greek word for 
Òfire.
ÓThus,pyrophosphoric acid is prepared by 
Òfire
ÓÑthat is,by heating. Triphosphoric
acid and higher polyphosphoric acids are also formed.P2O5nucleotidesadenosine 5-monophosphatea ribonucleotideNH2NNNNOOOOHOOHOP2-deoxycytidine 3-monophosphatea deoxyribonucleotideNH2NNOOOOOOPHO5-positionphosphategroup3-position35-nucleotide = base + sugar + phosphateBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 035
036CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsBecause phosphoric acid can form an anhydride,nucleotides can exist as monophos-
phates,diphosphates,and triphosphates. They are named by adding 
monophosphateordiphosphateor triphosphateto the name of the nucleoside.PROBLEM 2Draw the structure for each of the following:
a.dCDPc.dUMPe.guanosine 
b.dTTPd.UDPf.adenosine 
27.2ATP: The Carrier of Chemical Energy
All cells require energy to ensure their survival and reproduction. They get the
energy they need by converting nutrients into a chemically useful form of energy.

The most important form of chemical energy is adenosine -triphosphate (ATP).

The importance of ATP to biological reactions is shown by its turnover rate in hu-

mansÑeach day,a person uses an amount of ATP equivalent to his or her body
weight. ATP is known as the universal carrier of chemical energy because,as it is

commonly stated,Òthe energy of hydrolysis of ATP converts endergonic reactions
into exergonic reactions.
ÓIn other words,the ability of ATP to enable otherwise unfavorable reactions to
occur is attributed to the large amount of energy released when ATP is hydrolyzed,

which can be used to drive an endergonic reaction. For example,the reaction of
53-monophosphate5-triphosphatephosphoric acidpyrophosphoric acidtriphosphoric acid
OOHPP2O5OHOHO5OOHPOHOOHPHOOOOHPOOOHPOHOOHPHONNNNOOOPONH2OHOOH
adenosine5-monophosphateAMPNNNNOOOPOOOPONH2OHOOH
adenosine5-diphosphateADPNNNNOOOPOOOPOOOPONH2OHOOH
adenosine5-triphosphateATPNNNNOOOPONH2OHO2-deoxyadenosine5-monophosphatedAMPNNNNOOOPOOOPONH2OHO2-deoxyadenosine5-diphosphatedADPNNNNOOOPOOOPOOOPONH2OHO2-deoxyadenosine5-triphosphatedATPBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 036
Section 27.2ATP: The Carrier of Chemical Energy
0373-D Molecules:Adenosine -triphosphate
(ATP)
51The prime in indicates that two additional parameters have been added to the defined in
Section3.7
Ñthe reaction occurs in aqueous solution at and the concentration of water is
assumed to be constant.pH7G¡G¡D-glucose with hydrogen phosphate to form D-glucose-6-phosphate is endergonic
or .1The hydrolysis of ATP,on the other
hand,is highly exergonic or When the two

reactions are added together (the species occurring on both sides of the reaction arrow

cancel),the net reaction is exergonic or 

Thus,the energy released from the hydrolysis of ATP is more than enough to drive the

phosphorylation of D-glucose. Two reactions in which the energy of one is used to
drive the other are known as 
coupled reactions
.This nonmechanistic description of ATP
Õs power makes ATP look like a magical
source of energy. Let
Õs look at the mechanism of the reaction to see what really hap-
pens. The reaction is a simple one-step nucleophilic substitution reaction. The 6-OH

group of glucose attacks the terminal phosphate of ATP,breaking a 
phosphoanhydride
bondwithout forming an intermediate. Essentially it is an reaction with an
adenosine pyrophosphate leaving group.
Now we have a chemical understanding of why the phosphorylation of glucose requires
ATP. Without ATP,the 6-OH group of 
D-glucose would have to displace a very basic
group from hydrogen phosphate. With ATP,the 6-OH group of 
D-glucose displacesthe weakly basic ADP.
too basic to be displacedOOHOOPHHHHOHOHOHCH2OHOHOHhydrogenphosphateOHOOOPOOOPOOOPOadenosineATPHOHOa phosphoanhydride bondOOPOOOOOOPPOOadenosineADPD-glucoseD-glucose-6-phosphateHOOHCH2OHHOHOHOHOHOOHCH2OSN216.7 kJmol).(G¡
4.0 kcalmol30.5 kJmol).(G¡
7.3 kcalmol13.8 kJmol)(G¡
3.3 kcalmolD-glucosehydrogen phosphate
D-glucose-6-phosphateH
2O3.3 kcal/molGD-glucoseATP
D-glucose-6-phosphateADP
4.0 kcal/molATPH
2OADPhydrogen phosphate
7.3 kcal/mol13.8 kJ/mol16.7 kJ/mol30.5 kJ/molorororBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 037
038CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsAlthough the phosphorylation of glucose is described as being driven by the
ÒhydrolysisÓof ATP,you can see from the mechanism that glucose does not react
with hydrogen phosphate and that ATP is not hydrolyzed because it does not

reactwith water. In other words,neither of the coupled reactions actually occurs.

Instead,the phosphate group of ATP is transferred directly to 
D-glucose.The transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to 
D-glucose is an example of a
phosphoryl transfer reaction
. There are many phosphoryl transfer reactions in
biological systems. In all of these reactions,the electrophilic phosphate group is

transferred to a nucleophile as a result of breaking a phosphoanhydride bond. This

example of a phosphoryl transfer reaction demonstrates the actual chemical

function of ATP
Ñit provides a reaction pathway involving a good leaving group
for a reaction that cannot occur (or would occur very slowly) because of a poor

leaving group
.PROBLEM 3SOLVED
The hydrolysis of phosphoenolpyruvate is so highly exergonic or
that it can be used to 
Òdrive the formation
Óof ATP from ADP and hydrogen
phosphate or Propose a mechanism for this reaction.
SOLUTIONAs we saw in the example with ATP,neither of the coupled reactions actu-
ally occurs:phosphoenolpyruvate does not react with water and ADP does not react with

hydrogen phosphate. Just as ATP 
Òdrives the formation
Óof glucose-6-phosphate by sup-plying glucose (a nucleophile) with a phosphate that has a good leaving group (ADP),

phosphoenolpyruvate 
Òdrives the formation
Óof ATP by supplying ADP (a nucleophile)
with a phosphate that has a good leaving group (pyruvate).
PROBLEM 4Why is pyruvate a good leaving group?
PROBLEM 5Several important biomolecules and the values for their hydrolysis are listed here.

Which of them ÒhydrolyzesÓwith sufficient energy to 
Òdrive the formation
Óof ATP?
glycerol-1-phosphate:phosphocreatine:
fructose-6-phosphate:glucose-6-phosphate:
3.3 kcalmol (13.8 kJmol).3.8 kcalmol3 (15.9 kJmol)11.8 kcalmol (49.4 kJmol)2.2 kcalmol (9.2 kJmol)G¡30.5 kJmol).(G¡
7.3 kcalmol61.9 kJmol)(G¡
14.8 kcalmolOOOPOOPOOOOOPOOOadenosineOOOPOOPOOOPOadenosineCH2CCOOCH2CCOOOHOCH2CCOH2OtautomerizationADPATPphosphoenolpyruvateOOOCH3CCpyruvateATP provides a reaction pathway with a
good leaving group for a reaction that

cannot occur because of a poor leaving
group.
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 038
Section 27.3Three Mechanisms for Phosphoryl Transfer Reactions
03927.3Three Mechanisms for Phosphoryl
Transfer Reactions
There are three possible mechanisms for a phosphoryl transfer reaction. We will illus-
trate them using the following nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction.
This reaction does not occur without ATP because the negatively charged carboxylate
ion resists nucleophilic attack and,if the tetrahedral intermediate could be formed,

the incoming nucleophile is a weaker base than the base that would have to be ex-

pelled from the tetrahedral intermediate to form the thioester. In other words,the

thiol would be expelled from the tetrahedral intermediate,reforming the carboxylate

ion (Section17.5).
If ATP is added to the reaction mixture,the reaction occurs. The carboxylate ion at-
tacks one of the phosphate groups of ATP,breaking a phosphoanhydride bond. This

puts a leaving group on the carboxyl group that can be displaced by the thiol. There are

three possible mechanisms for the reaction of a nucleophile with ATP because each of

the three phosphorus atoms of ATP can undergo nucleophilic attack. Each mechanism

puts a different phosphate leaving group on the nucleophile.
If the carboxylate ion attacks the of ATP,an 
acyl phosphateisformed. The acyl phosphate then reacts with the thiol in a nucleophilic acyl substitu-

tion reaction (Section17.5) to form the thioester.
overall reactionRSHATPADPOOOPOHSRCOCH3OCOCH3g-phosphorusOOOOOPOPOOOadenosineATPOPSROHCH3CCHORSHOSRCH3COCH3OOTutorial:
Phosphoryl transfer reactionsnucleophilic attack on the   -phosphorusRSHOOOPOCOOOPOHOCH3OOOPOOPOOOOPOadenosineATPan acyl phosphateADPCOCH3OOOOPCOOCH3SRCOCH3a phosphoanhydride bondBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 039
040CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsIf the carboxylate ion attacks the -phosphorus of ATP,an 
acyl pyrophosphate
isformed. The acyl phosphate then reacts with the thiol in a nucleophilic acyl substitu-

tion reaction to form the thioester.
In the third possible mechanism,the carboxylate ion attacks the -phosphorus of
ATP,forming an 
acyl adenylate. The acyl phosphate then reacts with the thiol in a nu-
cleophilic acyl substitution reaction to form the thioester.
In Section17.20we saw that carboxylic acids in biological systems can be activat-
ed by being converted into acyl phosphates,acyl pyrophosphates,and acyl adenylates.

Each of these three mechanisms puts a leaving group on the carboxylic acid that can

easily be displaced by a nucleophile. The only difference in the three mechanisms is

the particular phosphate atom that is attacked by the nucleophile and the nature of the

intermediate that is formed.Many different nucleophiles react with ATP in biological systems. Whether nucleo-
philic attack occurs on the or -phosphorus in any particular reaction depends
gb-,a-,abOOOPOOPOOOOPOadenosineATPan acyl pyrophosphateAMPOPOOORSHOPOOHnucleophilic attack on the    -phosphorus
COCH3OOOOPCOOOPOOCH3OOOPCOOOPOOCH3SRCOCH3overall reactionRSHATPAMPOOOPOOOPOHSRCOCH3OCOCH3ATPan acyl adenylatenucleophilic attack on the    -phosphorus
OOPadenosineadenosineOOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOOPOadenosineOOOPORSHSRAMPH
COCH3COCH3COCH3COCH3overall reactionRSHATP
SRAMP
OOOPOOOPOHOCOCH3COCH3BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 040
Section 27.4The ÒHigh-EnergyÓ Character of Phosphoanhydride Bonds
041on the enzyme catalyzing the reaction (Section27.5). Mechanisms involving nucleo-
philic attack on the -phosphorus form ADP and phosphate as side products,whereas

mechanisms involving nucleophilic attack on the or -phosphorus form AMP and

pyrophosphate as side products.
When pyrophosphate is one of the side products,it is subsequently hydrolyzed to
two equivalents of phosphate. Consequently,in reactions in which pyrophosphate is

formed as a product,its subsequent hydrolysis drives the reaction to the right,ensuring

its irreversibility.
Therefore,enzyme-catalyzed reactions in which irreversibility is important take place
by one of the mechanisms that form pyrophosphate as a product (attack on the or 
-phosphorus of ATP). For example,both the reaction that links nucleotide subunits to
form nucleic acids (Section27.7) and the reaction that binds an amino acid to a tRNA

(the first step in translating RNA into a protein; Section27.12) involve nucleophilic

attack on the of ATP.
PROBLEM 6The of ATP has two phosphoanhydride linkages,but only the one linking
the -phosphorus to the -phosphorus is broken in phosphoryl transfer reactions. Explain

why the one linking the -phosphorus to the -phosphorus is never broken.
27.4The ÒHigh-EnergyÓ Characterof Phosphoanhydride BondsBecause the hydrolysis of a phosphoanhydride bond is a highly exergonic reaction,
phosphoanhydride bonds are called Òhigh-energy bonds.Ó
The term Òhigh-energy
Óinthis context means that a lot of energy is released when a reaction occurs that causes

the bond to break. Do not confuse it with 
Òbond energy,
Óthe term chemists use to de-scribe how difficult it is to break a bond. A bond with a 
high bond energy
is hard tobreak,whereas a 
high-energy bond
breaks readily.
Why is the hydrolysis of a phosphoanhydride bond so exergonic? In other words,
why is the value for its hydrolysis large and negative? A large negative 

means that the products of the reaction are much more stable than the reactants. Let
Õslook at ATP and its hydrolysis products,phosphate and ADP,to see why this is so.
Three factors contribute to the greater stability of ADP and phosphate compared 
to ATP:
1.Greater electrostatic repulsion in ATP.
At physiological pH 
ATP has 3.3 negative charges,ADP has 2.8 negative charges,and phosphate has

1.1 negative charges (Section1.20). Because of ATP
Õs greater negative charge,
more electrostatic repulsions are present in ATP than in ADP or phosphate.

Electrostatic repulsions destabilize a molecule.(pH7.3),G¡G¡gbabb-phosphorusa-phosphorusba-OOOOOPOPOpyrophosphateOOH
OOPphosphateH2O2ba-gOOOOOPOPOOOOPOOOHOPOOOOPOOOPadenosineH
2OadenosineHATPphosphateADP
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 041
042CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acids2.More solvation in the products.
Negatively charged ions are stabilized in an
aqueous solution by solvation. Because the reactant has 3.3 negative charges,

while the sum of the negative charges on the products is 3.9 there is

more solvation in the products than in the reactant.
3.Greater resonance stabilization in the products.
Delocalization of a lone pairon the oxygen joining the two phosphorus atoms is not very effective because it

puts a positive charge on an oxygen that is next to a partially positively charged

phosphorus atom. When the phosphoanhydride bond breaks,one additional lone

pair can be effectively delocalized.
Similar factors explain the large negative when ATP is hydrolyzed to AMP
and pyrophosphate,and when pyrophosphate is hydrolyzed to two equivalents of

phosphate.PROBLEM 7SOLVED
ATP has values of 0.9,1.5,2.3,and 7.7; ADP has values of 0.9,2.8,and 6.8; and
phosphoric acid has values of 1.9,6.7,and 12.4.

Do the calculation showing that at pH 7.3:
a.the charge on ATP is 
b.the charge on ADP is 

c.the charge on phosphate is 
SOLUTION TO 7aBecause pH 7.3 is much more basic than the values of the first
three ionizations of ATP,we know that these three groups will be entirely in their basic

forms at that pH,giving ATP three negative charges. We need to determine what fraction of

the group with 7.7 will be in its basic form at pH 7.3.
Because this equation has two unknowns,one of the unknowns must be expressed in terms
of the other unknown. Using the definition of the acid dissociation constant we can

define in terms of and 
 AAHAAAAHaaaH HAAHa 
aAHHAH.a,A,HA(a), HAconcentration of the acidic form Aconcentration of the basic formconcentration in the basic formtotal concentrationAAHApapa1.12.83.3papapaG¡OOHOOOOOPOOPOOPOOPthree lone pairscan be effectively
delocalizedfour lone pairscan be effectively
delocalized2.81.1,BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 042
Section 27.6Other Important Nucleotides
043lysinearginineNH2NNNNOOHHHNN
CMg2NH2HHHNOOPOOOPOOOPOOHOHFigure 27.2
The interactions between ATP,
and arginine and lysineresidues at the active site of an
enzyme.Mg2,Now we can calculate the fraction of the group with 7.7 that will be in the basic form.
27.5Kinetic Stability of ATP in the Cell
Although ATP reacts readily in enzyme-catalyzed reactions,it reacts quite slowly in
the absence of an enzyme. For example,carboxylic acid anhydrides hydrolyze in a

matter of minutes,but ATP takes several weeks to hydrolyze. The low rate of ATP hy-

drolysis is important because it allows ATP to exist in the cell until it is needed for an

enzyme-catalyzed reaction.The negative charges on ATP are what make it relatively unreactive. These negative
charges repel the approach of nucleophiles. When ATP is bound at an active site of an

enzyme,it complexes with magnesium which decreases the overall negative

charge on ATP. (This is why ATP-requiring enzymes also require metal ions;

Section25.5.) The other two negative charges can be stabilized by positively charged

groups such as arginine or lysine residues at the active site,as shown in Figure27.2. In

this form,ATP is readily approached by nucleophiles,so ATP reacts rapidly in an

enzyme-catalyzed reaction,but only very slowly in the absence of the enzyme.
(Mg2),total negative charge on ATP
3.0
0.3
3.3
aaH2.01082.01085.01080.3pa27.6Other Important NucleotidesATP is not the only biologically important nucleotide. Guanosine -triphosphate
(GTP) is used in place of ATP in some phosphoryl transfer reactions. We have also

seen in Sections25.2and 25.3that dinucleotides are used as oxidizing agents (
FAD,FMN) and reducing agents (NADH,NADPH,).
Another important nucleotide is adenosine -monophosphate,commonly known
as cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP is called a 
Òsecond messengerÓbecause it serves as a link
between several hormones (the first messengers) and certain enzymes that regulate cel-

lular function. Secretion of certain hormones,such as adrenaline,activates adenylate

cyclase,the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of cyclic AMP from ATP. Cyclic

AMP then activates an enzyme,generally by phosphorylating it. Cyclic nucleotides are

so important in regulating cellular reactions that an entire scientific journal is devoted to

these processes.3,5FMNH2FADH2,NADP,NAD,5BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 043
a trinucleotideOHA555333CGPPPa 5-triphosphategroupa 3-hydroxylgroup044CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acids3-D Molecule:Cyclic AMPErwin Chargaff
was born in Austria
in 1905 and received a Ph.D. from the

University of Vienna. To escape Hitler,

he came to the United States in 1935,
becoming a professor at Columbia

University College of Physicians and

Surgeons. He modified paper chro-

matography,a technique developed to

identify amino acids (Section23.5),so

that it could be used to quantify the
different bases in a sample of DNA.
PROBLEM 8What products would be obtained from the hydrolysis of cyclic AMP?
27.7The Nucleic AcidsNucleic acidsare composed of long strands of nucleotide subunits linked by phospho-
diester bonds. These linkages join the group of one nucleotide to the 

group of the next nucleotide (Figure27.1). A 
dinucleotidecontains two nucleotide
subunits,an 
oligonucleotidecontains three to ten subunits,and a 
polynucleotidecon-tains many subunits. DNA and RNA are polynucleotides. Notice that the nucleotide at

one end of the strand has an unlinked -triphosphate group,and the nucleotide at the

other end of the strand has an unlinked -hydroxyl group.
Nucleotide triphosphates are the starting materials for the biosynthesis of nucleicacids. DNA is synthesized by enzymes called 
DNA polymerases
,and RNA is
synthesized by enzymes called RNA polymerases
. The nucleotide strand is formed as
a result of nucleophilic attack by a group of one nucleotide triphosphate on the
-phosphorus of another nucleotide triphosphate,breaking a phosphoanhydride bond
and eliminating pyrophosphate (Figure27.3). This means that the growing polymer is

synthesized in the direction; in other words,new nucleotides are added to

the Pyrophosphate is subsequently hydrolyzed,which makes the reaction

irreversible (Section27.3). RNA strands are biosynthesized in the same way,using

ribonucleotides instead of -deoxyribonucleotides. The 
primary structure
of anucleic acid is the sequence of bases in the strand.Watson and Crick concluded that DNA consists of two strands of nucleic acids with
the sugarÐphosphate backbone on the outside and the bases on the inside. The chains
are held together by hydrogen bonds between the bases on one strand and the bases on

the other strand (Figure27.4). The width of the double-stranded molecule is relatively

constant,so a purine must pair with a pyrimidine. If the larger purines paired,the

strand would bulge; if the smaller pyrimidines paired,the strands would have to con-

tract to bring the two pyrimidines close enough to form hydrogen bonds.
Critical to Watson and Crick
Õs proposal for the secondary structure of DNA were
experiments carried out by Erwin Chargaff. These experiments showed that the num-

ber of adenines in DNA equals the number of thymines and the number of guanines

equals the number of cytosines. Chargaff also noted that the number of adenines and

thymines relative to the number of guanines and cytosines is characteristic of a given

species but varies from species to species. In human DNA,for example,60.4% of the

bases are adenines and thymines,whereas 74.2% of them are adenines and thymines

in the DNA of the bacterium 
Sarcina lutea
.Chargaff
Õs data showing that and 
could be explained if adenine (A) always paired with thymine (T) and guanine (G) al-

ways paired with cytosine (C). This means the two strands are 
complementaryÑwherethere is an A in one strand,there is a T in the opposing strand,and where there is a G in
[guanine][cytosine][adenine][thymine]23-end.53a3-OH355-OH3-OHATPcyclic AMPadenylate cyclaseNH2NNNNOHOOHPOOOPOOOMg2HOPNH2NNNNOOOPOOOHOOOPOOOOOOMg2OPBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 044
Section 27.7The Nucleic Acids
045OOCH2OOPOOOPOOOP5-end533-enda phosphoester bonda phosphoester bondthe 3-OH group attacksthe -phosphorus of thenext nucleotide to be
incorporated into the chainbaseObaseOHOOOPOOOOPOOOPOOOPbaseOHOOOOPOOOPOOOPbaseOHOOOOFigure 27.3
Addition of nucleotides to agrowing strand of DNA.
Biosynthesis occurs in the direction.53OOOOOOOOOOOTA5335OCOH5C53OH3PPTAPPTAPPCGPPCGPPCG3.4AFigure 27.4
Complementary base pairing inDNA. Adenine (a purine) always
pairs with thymine (a pyrimidine);
guanine (a purine) always pairs
with cytosine (a pyrimidine).2Watson was having difficulty understanding the base pairing in DNA because he thought the bases
existed in the enol form (see Problem10). When Jerry Donohue,an American crystallographer,in-

formed him that the bases more likely existed in the keto form,Chargaff
Õs data could easily be ex-
plained by hydrogen bonding between adenine and thymine and between guanine and cytosine.
one strand there is a C in the other strand (Figure27.4). Thus,if you know the sequence
of bases in one strand,you can figure out the sequence of bases in the other strand.
What causes adenine to pair with thymine rather than with cytosine (the other
pyrimidine)? The base pairing is dictated by hydrogen bonding. Learning that the

bases exist in the keto form (Section19.2) allowed Watson to explain the pairing.
2Adenine forms two hydrogen bonds with thymine but would form only one hydrogen

bond with cytosine. Guanine forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine but would

form only one hydrogen bond with thymine (Figure27.5). The and
NH    Nthymineadenine
sugarsugarcytosineguanine
sugarsugarOHNHNHNNNNHHONNNHCH3NNHHNNOONNFigure 27.5
Base pairing in DNA: Adenine andthymine form two hydrogen bonds;
cytosine and guanine form three
hydrogen bonds. [G][C] [A][T]BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 045
046CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acidsa.b.c.Figure 27.7
(a)The DNA double helix. (b)View looking down the long axis of the helix. (c)The bases
are planar and parallel on the inside of the helix.CGOOOOOOATOOOPOOOP5335OOOOFigure 27.6
The sugarÐphosphate backbone of DNA is on the outside, and the bases are on the inside,with AÕs pairing with TÕs and GÕs pairing with CÕs. The two strands are antiparallelÑtheyrun in opposite directions.bonds that hold the bases together are all about the same length
†).The two DNA strands are antiparallel
Ñthey run in opposite directions,with the
sugarÐphosphate backbone on the outside and the bases on the inside (Figures27.4
and27.6). By convention,the sequence of bases in a polynucleotide is written in the
direction (the -end is on the left).
The DNA strands are not linear but are twisted into a helix around a common axis
(see Figure27.7a). The base pairs are planar and parallel to each other on the inside

of the helix (Figures27.7band c). The secondary structure is therefore known as a
5-end3-endATGAGCCATGTAGCCTAATCGGC553(2.90.1NH    OBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 046
PROBLEM 9Indicate whether each functional group of the five heterocyclic bases in nucleic acids can
function as a hydrogen bond acceptor (A),a hydrogen bond donor (D),or both (D/A).
PROBLEM 10Using the D,A,and D/A designations in Problem9,explain how base pairing would be

affected if the bases existed in the enol form.
Section 27.7The Nucleic Acids
047OOOOOOPbaseOObaseOHOHOOOOOOOPbaseOObasea 2,3-cyclic phosphodiesterOHOOOOOOPbaseOObaseOHHOFigure 27.8
Hydrolysis of RNA. The -OH group acts as an intramolecular nucleophilic catalyst. It has
been estimated that RNA is hydrolyzed 3 billion times faster than DNA.23-D Molecules:AdenineÐthymine base pair;GuanineÐcytosine base pair3-D Molecule:DNA double helixdouble helix. The double helix resembles a ladder (the base pairs are the rungs)
twisted around an axis running down through its rungs (Figures27.4and 27.7c). The

sugarÐphosphate backbone is wrapped around the bases. The phosphate OH group
has a of about 2,so it is in its basic form (negatively charged) at physiological

pH. The negatively charged backbone repels nucleophiles,thereby preventing

cleavage of the phosphodiester bonds.
UnlikeDNA,RNA is easily cleaved because the group of ribose can act as
the nucleophile that cleaves the strand (Figure27.8). This explains why the 

group is absent in DNA. To preserve the genetic information,DNA must remain intact

throughout the life span of a cell. Cleavage of DNA would have disastrous conse-

quences for the cell and for life itself. RNA,in contrast,is synthesized as it is needed

and is degraded once it has served its purpose.
Hydrogen bonding between base pairs is just one of the forces holding the two
strands of the DNA double helix together. The bases are planar aromatic mole-

cules that stack on top of one another. Each pair is slightly rotated with respect to

the next pair,like a partially spread-out hand of cards. There are favorable van der

Waals interactions between the mutually induced dipoles of adjacent pairs of

bases. These interactions,known as 
stacking interactions,are weak attractive
forces,but when added together they contribute significantly to the stability of the

double helix. Stacking interactions are strongest between two purines and weakest

between two pyrimidines. Confining the bases to the inside of the helix has an

additional stabilizing effect
Ñit reduces the surface area of the relatively nonpolar
residues exposed to water. This increases the entropy of the surrounding water

molecules (Section23.14).
2-OH2-OHpaBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 047
048CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsFigure 27.9
The three helical forms of DNA.PROBLEM 11The phosphodiester,which is formed when RNA is hydrolyzed (Figure27.8),
reacts with water,forming a mixture of nucleotide and -phosphates. Propose a mech-

anism for this reaction.PROBLEM 12If one of the strands of DNA has the following sequence of bases running in the
direction,a.What is the sequence of bases in the complementary strand?
b.What base is closest to the in the complementary strand?
27.8Helical Forms of DNANaturally occurring DNA can exist in the three different helical forms shown in
Figure27.9. The B-and A-helices are both right-handed. The B-helix is the predomi-

nant form in aqueous solution,while the A-helix is the predominant form in nonpolar

solvents. Nearly all the DNA in living organisms is in a B-helix. The Z-helix is a left-

handed helix. It occurs in regions where there is a high content of base pairs.

The A-helix is shorter (for a given number of base pairs) and about 3% broader than

the B-helix,which is shorter and broader than the Z-helix.
Helices are characterized by the number of bases per 360
¡turn and the distance (therise) between adjacent base pairs. A-DNA has 11 base pairs per turn and a 2.3
† rise;
B-DNA has 10 base pairs per turn and a 3.4
† rise; and Z-DNA has 12 base pairs per
turn and a 3.8† rise.If you examine Figure27.9,you will see that there are two kinds of alternating
grooves in DNA. In B-DNA the 
major groove
is wider than the minor groove
. Crosssections of the double helix show that one side of each base pair faces into the major

groove and the other side faces into the minor groove (Figure27.10).
Proteins and other molecules can bind to the grooves. The hydrogen-bonding
properties of the functional groups facing into each groove determinewhat kind of

molecules will bind to the groove. Mitomycin is a naturally occurring compound

that has been found to have both antibacterial activity and anticancer activity. It

works by binding to the minor groove of DNA. It binds at regions rich in A
Õs andTÕs (Section30.10).
GC5-end5GGACAATCTGC35332-2,3-cyclicAADTYDZ0  missing size
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 048
Section 27.9Biosynthesis of DNA: Replication
049thymineÐadeninecytosine
Ðguaninesugarsugarmajor grooveminor groovesugarsugarmajor grooveminor grooveNHCH3NNHHNNOOONNOHNHNHNNNNHHNNPROBLEM 13Calculate the length of a turn in:a.A-DNAb.B-DNAc.Z-DNA
27.9Biosynthesis of DNA: ReplicationWatson and Crick
Õs proposal for the structure of DNA was an exciting development
because the structure immediately suggested how DNA is able to pass on genetic in-

formation to succeeding generations. Because the two strands are complementary,

both carry the same genetic information. Both strands serve as templates for the

synthesis of complementary new strands (Figure27.11). The new (daughter) DNA
3-D Molecules:B-helix; A-helix; Z-helixATTATATATATATATAATATATATATATATATCGCGCG
CGGCGCGCGCGCGCGCGCGCCGparent strandsuncoiling3-end3-end5-end3-end3-end5-end5-end5-enddaughterstranddaughter
strandFigure 27.11
Replication of DNA. The daughterstrand on the left is synthesized
continuously in the 
direction; the daughter strand 
on the right is synthesized
discontinuously in the 
direction.5353Figure 27.10
One side of each base pair facesinto the major groove, and the
other side faces into the minor
groove.BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 049
050CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsSevero Ochoa
was the first to
prepare synthetic strands of RNA by

incubating nucleotides in the
presence of enzymes that are involved

in the biosynthesis of RNA. 
ArthurKornberg
prepared synthetic strands
of DNA in a similar manner. For this

work,they shared the 1959 Nobel

Prize in physiology or medicine.
Severo Ochoa (1905Ð1993)
wasborn in Spain. He graduated from the

University of Malaga in 1921 and

received an M.D. from the University

of Madrid. He spent the next four

years studying in Germany and

England and then joined the faculty
at New York University College of

Medicine. He became a U.S. citizen

in 1956.molecules are identical to the original (parent) moleculeÑthey contain all the original
genetic information. The synthesis of identical copies of DNA is called 
replication
.All reactions involved in nucleic acid synthesis are catalyzed by enzymes. The syn-
thesis of DNA takes place in a region of the molecule where the strands have started to

separate,called a 
replication fork
. Because a nucleic acid can be synthesized only inthe direction,only the daughter strand on the left in Figure27.11is syn-

thesized continuously in a single piece (because it is synthesized in the di-

rection). The other daughter strand needs to grow in the direction,so it is

synthesized discontinuously in small pieces. Each piece is synthesized in the
direction and the fragments are joined together by an enzyme called DNA
ligase. Each of the two resulting daughter molecules of DNA that result contains one

of the original strands (blue strand) plus a newly synthesized strand (green strand).

This process is called semiconservative replication
.The genetic information of a human cell is contained in 23 pairs of chromosomes.Each chromosome is composed of several thousand 
genes(segments of DNA). The
total DNA of a human cell
Ñthe human genomeÑcontains 3.1 billion base pairs.PROBLEM 14Using a dark line for parental DNA and wavy lines for DNA synthesized from parental
DNA,show what the population of DNA molecules would look like in the fourth generation.
PROBLEM 15Assuming that the human genome,with its 3.1 billion base pairs,is entirely in a B-helix,

how long is the DNA in a human cell?
PROBLEM 16Why doesnÕt DNA unravel completely before replication begins?
27.10Biosynthesis of RNA: Transcription
The sequence of DNA bases provides the blueprint for the synthesis of RNA. The syn-
thesis of RNA from a DNA blueprint,called 
transcription,takes place in the nucleus
of the cell. This initial RNA is the precursor to all RNA:messenger RNA,ribosomal

RNA,and transfer RNA. The newly synthesized RNA leaves the nucleus,carrying the

genetic information into the cytoplasm (the cell material outside the nucleus),where

translation of this information into proteins takes place (see Figure 27.17).
DNA contains sequences of bases known as 
promoter sites
. The promoter sites
mark the beginning of genes. An enzyme recognizes a promoter site and binds to it,

initiating RNA synthesis. The DNA at a promoter site unwinds to give two single

strands,exposing the bases. One of the strands is called the 
sense strandorinformational strand
. The complementary strand is called the 
template strandorantisense strand. The template strand is read in the direction,so that
RNA can be synthesized in the direction (Figure27.12). The bases in the

template strand specify the bases that need to be incorporated into RNA,following the

same base pairing found in DNA. For example,each guanine in the template strand

specifies the incorporation of a cytosine into RNA,and each adenine in the template

strand specifies the incorporation of a uracil into RNA. (Recall that in RNA,uracil is

used instead of thymine.). Because both the sense strand and RNA are complementary

to the template strand,the sense strand and RNA have the same base sequence,except

that RNA has a uracil wherever the sense strand has a thymine. Just as there are pro-

moter sites that signal the places to start RNA synthesis,there are sites in DNA that

signal that no more bases should be added to the growing strand of RNA,at which

point synthesis stops.533553355353Arthur Kornberg
was born in New
York in 1918. He graduated from the

College of the City of New York and

received an M.D. from the University

of Rochester. He is a member of the

faculty of the biochemistry

department at Stanford University.
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 050
Section 27.11Ribosomal RNA
051553533TATATAGUCUCGAUACACGOHTACGCGCGTACGTACGCGGCGCGCGCGCGCTAGAGC
TATGTGCGT
CTCTCGAT
direction of transcriptionACACGCAAGCCGGAGRNADNAAUCCpppAATAGCATATATsense strandtemplate strandFigure 27.12
Transcription: using DNA as a blueprint for RNA.
Surprisingly,a gene is not necessarily a continuous sequence of bases. Often the
bases of a gene are interrupted by bases that appear to have no informational content.

A stretch of bases representing a portion of a gene is called an exon,while a stretch of
bases that contains no genetic information is called an intron
. The RNA that is syn-
thesized is complementary to the entire sequence of DNA bases
Ñexons and introns.
So after the RNA is synthesized,but before it leaves the nucleus,the so-called non-

sense bases (encoded by the introns) are cut out and the informational fragments are

spliced together,resulting in a much shorter RNA molecule. This RNA processing

step is known as 
RNA splicing
. Scientists have found that only about 2% of DNA con-
tains genetic information,while 98% consists of introns.
It has been suggested that the purpose of introns is to make RNA more versatile. The
originally synthesized long strand of RNA can be spliced in different ways to create a va-

riety of shorter RNAs.
PROBLEM 17Why do both thymine and uracil specify the incorporation of adenine?27.11Ribosomal RNARNA is much shorter than DNA and is generally single-stranded. Although DNA mole-
cules can have billions of base pairs,RNA molecules rarely have more than 10,000 nu-

cleotides. There are three kinds of RNA
Ñmessenger RNA (mRNA)
whose sequenceof bases determines the sequence of animo acids in a protein,ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
,a structural component of ribosomes,and transfer RNA (tRNA),the carriers of amino

acids for protein synthesis.The biosynthesis of proteins takes place on particles known as 
ribosomes. A ribo-
some is composed of about 40% protein and about 60% rRNA. There is increasing evi-

dence that protein synthesis is catalyzed by rRNA molecules rather than by enzymes.

RNA molecules
Ñfound in ribosomes
Ñthat act as catalysts are known as 
ribozymes.The protein molecules in the ribosome enhance the functioning of the rRNA molecules.
Ribosomes are made up of two subunits. The size of the subunits depends on whether
they are found in prokaryotic organisms or eukaryotic organisms. 
Prokaryotic organ-
isms(pro
,Greek for 
ÒbeforeÓ; karyon,Greek for 
Òkernel
Óor ÒnutÓ) are the earliest or-ganisms. They are unicellular and do not have nuclei. A 
eukaryotic organism
(eu,Greek for ÒwellÓ) is much more complicated. Eukaryotic organisms can be unicellular
or multicellular and their cells have nuclei. A prokaryotic ribosome is composed of a

50S subunit and a smaller 30S subunit; together they form a 70S ribosome. A eukaryot-

ic ribosome has a 60S subunit and a 40S subunit; together they form an 80S ribosome.
Sidney Altmanand Thomas R.Cechreceived the 1989 Nobel Prize
in chemistry for their discovery of the

catalytic properties of RNA.
Sidney Altmanwas born inMontreal in 1939. He received a B.S.

from MIT and a Ph.D. from the

University of Colorado,Boulder. He

was a postdoctoral fellow in Francis

CrickÕs laboratory at Cambridge

University. He is a professor of

biology at Yale University.
Thomas Cechwas born in Chicago
in 1947. He received a B.A. from

Grinnell College and a Ph.D. from

the University of California,

Berkeley. He was a postdoctoral

fellow at MIT. He is a professor of

chemistry at the University of

Colorado,Boulder.
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 051
052CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acids35a.OHanticodonUGCCCGGCUCAGGCC
CGCAACCCAGCCUGCUGUGUGGUGUAAAUCGCGUAGCCCGGGCGGGGCCGCall tRNAs haveCCA at the 3-endFigure 27.13
(a)a transfer RNA that
carries alanine. Compared with
other RNAs, tRNA contains a high
percentage of unusual bases
(shown as empty circles). These
bases result from enzymatic
modification of the four normal
bases. (b)The anticodon is

shown in red; the serine binding
site is shown in yellow.
tRNASer:tRNAAla,b.3-D Molecule:tRNA3Sedimentation constants are not additive,which is why a 50S and a 30S can combine to form a 70S.
The S stands for the sedimentation constant,which designates where a given compo-
nent sediments during centrifugation.327.12Transfer RNA
Transfer RNA (tRNA) is much smaller than mRNA or rRNA. It contains only 70 to 90
nucleotides. The single strand of tRNA is folded into a characteristic cloverleaf struc-

ture strung out with three loops and a little bulge next to the right-hand loop

(Figure27.13a). There are at least four regions with complementary base pairing. All

tRNAs have a CCA sequence at the The three bases at the bottom of the loop

directly opposite the and are called an 
anticodon(Figures27.13aand b).
Each tRNA can carry an amino acid bound as an ester to its terminal group.
The amino acid will be inserted into a protein during protein biosynthesis. Each tRNA

can carry only one particular amino acid. A tRNA that carries alanine is designated as
tRNAAla.3-OH3-ends5-3-end.30S50S40S80S70Seukaryotic ribosomeprokaryotic ribosomeMW 4,200,000MW 2,500,00060SBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 052
Section 27.12Transfer RNA
053AMPATPOOOPOOOPOOOOOPOOPOOOOHOPOOOPOOOOPOOOOOPOadenosineadenosineadenosineORCHCNH3OORCHCNH3OORCHCCNH3RCHNH3HOACC3-OH group of Aa tetrahedral intermediatetRNAH2O2ACC555ACCan acyl adenylatean aminoacidan amino acyl tRNApyrophosphateFigure 27.14
The proposed mechanism foraminoacyl-tRNA synthetaseÑtheenzyme that catalyzes the
attachment of an amino acid 
to a tRNA.Elizabeth Keller (1918Ð1997)
wasthe first to recognize that tRNA had a

cloverleaf structure. She received a

B.S. from the University of Chicago

in 1940 and a Ph.D. from Cornell

University Medical College in 1948.

She worked at the Huntington

Memorial Laboratory of

Massachusetts General Hospital 

and at the United States Public
Health Service. Later she became 

a professor at MIT and then at 

Cornell University.
It is critical that the correct amino acid is attached to the tRNA. Otherwise,the
correct protein will not be synthesized. Fortunately,the synthetases correct their

ownmistakes. For example,valine and threonine are approximately the same size
Ñthreonine has an OH group in place of a group of valine. Both amino acids,

therefore,can bind at the amino acid binding site of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase for

valine,and both can then be activated by reacting with ATP to form an acyl adenylate.

The aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase for valine has two adjacent catalytic sites,one for
CH3aminoacyl-tRNA synthetasespecific for histidinebinding site fortRNAHisbinding site forhistidineNHNOOH2NCHC
CH2OHAC
CFigure 27.15
An aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase hasa binding site for tRNA and a
binding site for the particular
amino acid that is to be attached to
that tRNA. Histidine is the amino
acid and is the tRNA

molecule in this example.tRNAHisHow does an amino acid become attached to a tRNA? Attachment of the amino acid
is catalyzed by an enzyme called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. In the first step of the

enzyme-catalyzed reaction (Figure27.14),the carboxyl group of the amino acid at-

tacks the of ATP,activating the carboxyl group by forming an acyl

adenylate. The pyrophosphate that is expelled is subsequently hydrolyzed,ensuring

the irreversibility of the phosphoryl transfer reaction (Section27.3). Then a nucle-

ophilic acyl substitution reaction occurs
Ñthe group of tRNAattacks the car-
bonyl carbon of the acyl adenylate,forming a tetrahedral intermediate. The amino acyl

tRNA is formed when AMP is expelled from the tetrahedral intermediate. All the steps

take place at the active site of the enzyme. Each amino acid has its own aminoacyl-

tRNA synthetase. Each synthetase has two specific binding sites,one for the amino

acid and one for the tRNA that carries that amino acid (Figure27.15).
3-OHa-phosphorusBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 053
054CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsTable 27.2The Genetic Code
Middle positionUCAG
UPheSerTyrCys
UPheSerTyrCys
CLeuSerStopStop
ALeuSerStopTrp
GCLeuProHisArg
ULeuProHisArg
CLeuProGlnArg
ALeuProGlnArg
GAIleThrAsnSer
UIleThrAsnSer
CIleThrLysArg
AMetThrLysArg
GGValAlaAspGly
UValAlaAspGly
CValAlaGluGly
AValAlaGluGly
G5-Position5-PositionThe genetic code was worked out
independently by Marshall Nirenberg
and Har Gobind Khorana,for which
they shared the 1968 Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine. 
RobertHolley,who worked on the structure 
of tRNA molecules,also shared that

yearÕs prize.
Marshall Nirenberg
was born in New York in 1927. He received a

bachelorÕs degree from the University

of Florida and a Ph.D. from the Uni-

versity of Michigan. He is a scientist

at the National Institutes of Health.Har Gobind Khoranawas born in India in 1922. He received a

bachelorÕs and a masterÕs degree

from Punjab University and a Ph.D.

from the University of Liverpool. 

In 1960 he joined the faculty at the
University of Wisconsin and later

became a professor at MIT.
attaching the acyl adenylate to tRNA and one for hydrolyzing the acyl adenylate. The
acylation site is hydrophobic,so valine is preferred over threonine for the tRNA acyla-

tion reaction. The hydrolytic site is polar,so threonine is preferred over valine for the

hydrolysis reaction. Thus,if threonine is activated by the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase

for valine,it will be hydrolyzed rather than transferred to the tRNA.
27.13Biosynthesis of Proteins: Translation
A protein is synthesized from its N-terminal end to its C-terminal end by reading the
bases along the mRNA strand in the direction. A sequence of three bases,

called a codon,specifies a particular amino acid that is to be incorporated into a pro-
tein. The bases are read consecutively and are never skipped. A codon is written with

the -nucleotide on the left. Each amino acid is specified by a three-base sequence

known as the 
genetic code(Table27.2). For example,UCA on mRNA codes for the
amino acid serine,whereas CAG codes for glutamine.
Because there are four bases and the codons are triplets,different codons
are possible. This is many more than are needed to specify the 20 different amino

acids,so all the amino acids
Ñexcept methionine and tryptophan
Ñhave more than one
codon. It is not surprising,therefore,that methionine and tryptophan are the least

abundant amino acids in proteins. Actually,61 of the bases specify amino acids,and

three bases are stop codons. Stop codonstell the cell to Òstop protein synthesis here.ÓTranslation
is the process by which the genetic message in DNA that has been
passed to mRNA is decoded and used to build proteins. Each of the approximately

100,000 proteins in the human body is synthesized from a different mRNA. Don
Õt4364553CH3OCH3CHNH3CHCOvalineOHOCH3CHNH3CHCOthreonineBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 054
Section 27.13Biosynthesis of Proteins: Translation
055confuse transcription and translationÑthese words are used just as they are used in
English. Transcription (DNA to RNA) is copying 
within the same language
ofnucleotides. Translation (RNA to protein) is 
changing to another language
Ñthe lan-guage of amino acids.How the information in mRNA is translated into a polypeptide is shown in
Figure27.16. In this figure,serine was the last amino acid incorporated into the
codonanticodontRNAmRNAgrowingpolypeptide
chaintRNA that
had carried
serinethe ester and the primary amino groups engage in 
a nucleophilic acyl 
substitution reactionleucinecodes for
alanineserineAAGAAGCGAUUCCCG53GGCGCUCGAUUCCCGCUGCCCAAG53RONHCHC
ROOACCONHCHCNH
CH2OHCHC
AAGAAGOACCOH2NCH2CH3CH3CHCHC
GCUCGAUUCCCG53RONHCHC
ROOACCONHCHCNH
CH2OHCHC
AAGOACCOH2NCH2CH3CH3CHCHC
RONHCHC
ROOONHCHC
OCNHCH2OHCHNH
CH2CHCHC
OACCACCOHACCOH2NCH3CH3CH3CHC
Figure 27.16
Translation. The sequence of bases
in mRNA determines the sequence
of amino acids in a protein.Transcription: DNA
RNATranslation: mRNA
proteinTutorial:
Translation
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 055
056CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acidsamino acidtranscriptionmodificationof RNA1translation5mRNAnucleuscytoplasmrRNAmRNADNAtRNA binds anamino acidinitial RNAtranscriptnuclearenvelopetRNA24addition ofprotein to RNA3ribosomegrowing polypeptidechaingrowing polypeptide chain. Serine was specified by the AGC codon because the
anticodon of the tRNA that carries serine is GCU (Remember that a

base sequence is read in thedirection,so the sequence of bases in an an-

ticodon must be read from right to left.) The next codon is CUU,signaling for a

tRNA with an anticodon of AAG That particular tRNA carries leucine.

The amino group of leucine reacts in an enzyme-catalyzed nucleophilic acyl substi-

tution reaction with the ester on the adjacent tRNA,displacing the tRNA. The next

codon (GCC) brings in a tRNA carrying alanine. The amino group of alanine dis-

places the tRNA that brought in leucine. Subsequent amino acids are brought in one

at a time in the same way,with the codon in mRNA specifying the amino acid to be

incorporated by complementary base pairing with the anticodon of the tRNA that

carries that amino acid.Protein synthesis takes place on the ribosomes (Figure27.17). The smaller subunit
of the ribosome (30S in prokaryotic cells) has three binding sites for RNA molecules.

It binds the mRNA whose base sequence is to be read,the tRNA carrying the growing

peptide chain,and the tRNA carrying the next amino acid to be incorporated into the

protein. The larger subunit of the ribosome (50S in prokaryotic cells) catalyzes peptide

bond formation.(3-GAA-5).53(3-UCG-5).Figure 27.17
1.Transcription of DNA occurs in
the nucleus. The initial RNA
transcript is the precursor of all
RNA: tRNA, rRNA, and mRNA.2.The initially formed RNA often
must be chemically modified
before it acquires biological
activity. Modification can entail

removing nucleotide segments,
adding nucleotides to the -or
-ends, or chemically alteringcertain nucleotides.3.Proteins are added to rRNA to
form ribosomal subunits. tRNA,
mRNA, and ribosomal subunits
leave the nucleus.4.Each tRNA binds the appropriate
amino acid.5.tRNA, mRNA, and a ribosome
work together to translate the
mRNA information into a
protein.35BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 056
PROBLEM 18If methionine is the first amino acid incorporated into a heptapeptide,what is the sequence
of the amino acids encoded for by the following stretch of mRNA?
PROBLEM 19Four CÕs occur in a row in the segment of mRNA in Problem18. What polypeptide would

be formed from the mRNA if one of the four CÕs were cut out of the strand?
PROBLEM 20UAA is a stop codon. Why does the UAA sequence in mRNA in Problem18 not cause pro-

tein synthesis to stop?PROBLEM 21Write the sequences of bases in the sense strand of DNA that resulted in the mRNA in

Problem18.
PROBLEM 22List the possible codons on mRNA that specify each amino acid in Problem18 and the an-

ticodon on the tRNA that carries that amino acid.
UAAACAC35GCAUGGACCCCGUUAUSection 27.13Biosynthesis of Proteins: Translation
0573-D Molecules:Chloramphenicol complexed
to acetyl-transferase;
Tetracycline
A sculpture done by Robert Holley.
Robert W. Holley (1922Ð1993)
wasborn in Illinois and received a
bachelorÕs degree from the University

of Illinois and a Ph.D. from Cornell

University. During World War II he

worked on the synthesis of penicillin

at Cornell Medical School. He was a

professor at Cornell and later at the

University of California,San Diego.

He was also a noted sculptor.
SICKLE CELL ANEMIASickle cell anemia is an example of the damage that

can be caused by a change in a single base of DNA
(Problem55 in Chapter23). It is a hereditary disease caused

when a GAG triplet becomes a GTG triplet in the sense strand of

a section of DNA that codes for the -subunit of hemoglobin. As

a consequence,the mRNA codon becomes GUG
Ñwhich signalsbfor incorporation of valine
Ñrather than GAG,which would
have signaled for incorporation of glutamic acid. The change
from a polar glutamic acid to a nonpolar valine is sufficient to

change the shape of the deoxyhemoglobin molecule and induce
aggregation,causing it to precipitate in red blood cells. This

stiffens the cells,making it difficult for them to squeeze

through a capillary. Blocked capillaries cause severe pain and

can be fatal.
Normal red blood cellsSickle red blood cellsBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  4:14 PM  Page 057058CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsANTIBIOTICS THAT ACT BY
INHIBITING TRANSLATION
Puromycin is a naturally occurring antibiotic. It isone of several antibiotics that act by inhibiting translation.

Puromycin mimics the -CCA-aminoacyl portion of a tRNA.

If,during translation,the enzyme is fooled into transferring the

growing peptide chain to the amino group of puromycin rather

than to the amino group of the incoming -CCA-aminoacyl

tRNA,protein synthesis stops. Because puromycin blocks pro-

tein synthesis in eukaryotes as well as in prokaryotes,it is poi-

sonous to humans and therefore is not a clinically useful
antibiotic. To be clinically useful,an antibiotic must affect pro-

tein synthesis only in prokaryotic cells.33ONHOHNNNH3CCH
3NNHOOCH2CHCNH2puromycinCH3OClinically usefulantibioticsMode of action
TetracyclinePrevents the aminoacyl-tRNA from binding to the ribosome
ErythromycinPrevents the incorporation of new amino acids into the protein

StreptomycinInhibits the initiation of protein synthesis

ChloramphenicolPrevents the new peptide bond from being formed
27.14Why DNA Contains Thymine Instead of UracilIn Section25.8we saw that dTMP is formed when dUMP is methylated,with coenzyme
-methylenetetrahydrofolate supplying the methyl group. Because the incorpora-
tion of the methyl group into uracil oxidizes tetrahydrofolate to dihydrofolate,dihydrofo-

late must be reduced back to tetrahydrofolate to prepare the cofactor for another catalytic

cycle. The reducing agent is NADPH. Every NADPH formed in a biological organism

can drive the formation of three ATPs,so using an NADPH to reduce dihydrofolate

comes at the expense of ATP. This means that the synthesis of thymine is energetically

expensive,so there must be a good reason for DNA to contain thymine instead of uracil.
The presence of thymine instead of uracil in DNA prevents potentially lethal muta-
tions. Cytosine can tautomerize to form an imine,which can be hydrolyzed to uracil

(Section18.6). The overall reaction is called a 
deaminationsince it removes an amino
group.tautomerizationcytosineuracilNONH2NHNHNHHNNH3H2OONHHNOO105,NRdUMPR2-deoxyribose-5-P
HNN5,N10-methylene-THFdihydrofolatethymidylatesynthaseOONRHNOCH3OtetrahydrofolateNADP
dihydrofolateNADPH
HdihydrofolatereductasedTMPBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 058
Section 27.15Determining the Base Sequence of DNA
059If a cytosine in DNA is deaminated to a uracil,uracil will specify incorporation of
an adenine into the daughter strand during replication instead of the guanine that
would have been specified by cytosine. Fortunately,a U in DNA is recognized as a

Òmistake
Óby cell enzymes before an incorrect base can be inserted into the daughter
strand. These enzymes cut out the U and replace it with a C. If U
Õs were normally
found in DNA,the enzymes could not distinguish between a normal U and a U formed

by deamination of cytosine. Having T
Õs in place of UÕs in DNA allows the U
Õs that arefound in DNA to be recognized as mistakes.
Unlike DNA,which replicates itself,any mistake in RNA does not survive for
long because RNA is constantly being degraded and then resynthesized from the

DNA template. Therefore,it is not worth spending the extra energy to incorporate

TÕs into RNA.
PROBLEM 23Adenine can be deaminated to hypoxanthine,and guanine can be deaminated to xanthine.
Draw structures for hypoxanthine and xanthine.
PROBLEM 24Explain why thymine cannot be deaminated.27.15Determining the Base Sequence of DNAIn June 2000,two teams of scientists (one from a private biotechnology company and
one from the publicly funded Human Genome Project) announced that they had com-

pleted the first draft of the sequence of the 3.1 billion base pairs in human DNA. This

is an enormous accomplishment. For example,if the sequence of 1 million base pairs

were determined each day,it would take more than 10 years to complete the sequence

of the human genome.DNA molecules are too large to sequence as a unit,so DNA is first cleaved at spe-
cific base sequences and the resulting DNA fragments are sequenced. The enzymes

that cleave DNA at specific base sequences are called 
restriction endonucleases
,and the DNA fragments that are formed are called 
restriction fragments
. Several
hundred restriction enzymes are now known. A few examples of restriction en-

zymes,the base sequence each recognizes,and the point of cleavage in that base

sequence are shown here.
The base sequences that most restriction enzymes recognize are palindromes
. Apalindrome is a word or a group of words that reads the same forward and backward.

ÒToot
Óand Òrace carÓare examples of palindromes.
4A restriction enzyme recognizesAGCTTCGAGGCCCCGGCTGCAGGACGTCrecognition sequencerestriction enzymeAluIFnu
DIPst
I4Some other palindromes are ÒMom,ÓÒDad,ÓÒBob,ÓÒLil,ÓÒradar,
ÓÒnoon,ÓÒwow,
ÓÒpoor Dan in adroopÓ,Òa man,a plan,a canal,Panama,
ÓÒSex at noon taxes,
Óand ÒHe lived as a devil,eh?
ÓBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 059
060CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsFrederick Sanger
(Section23.12)
and Walter Gilbert
shared half of
the 1980 Nobel Prize in chemistry for

their work on DNA sequencing. The

other half went to Paul Berg
,who
had developed a method of cutting

nucleic acids at specific sites and

recombining the fragments in new

ways,a technique known as

recombinant DNA technology.
Walter Gilbert
was born in Bostonin 1932. He received a master
Õsdegree in physics from Harvard and a

Ph.D. in mathematics from

Cambridge University. In 1958 he

joined the faculty at Harvard,where

he became interested in molecular

biology.
Paul Berg
was born in New York in
1926. He received a Ph.D. from

Western Reserve University (now

Case Western Reserve University).

He joined the faculty at Washington

University in St. Louis in 1955 and

became a professor of biochemistry

at Stanford in 1959.
a piece of DNA in which 
the template strand is a palindrome of the sense strand
. Inother words,the sequence of bases in the template strand (reading from right to left) is

identical to the sequence of bases in the sense strand (reading from left to right).PROBLEM 25Which of the following base sequences would most likely be recognized by a restriction
endonuclease?a.ACGCGTc.ACGGCAe.ACATCGT
b.ACGGGTd.ACACGTf.CCAACC
The restriction fragments can be sequenced using a chain-terminator procedure de-veloped by Frederick Sanger known as the 
dideoxy method. This method involves
generating fragments whose length depends on the last base added to the fragment.
Because of its simplicity,it has superceded alternative methods.
In the dideoxy method a small piece of DNA called a primer,labeled at the 
with is added to the restriction fragment whose sequence is to be determined.

Next,the four -deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates are added as well as DNA poly-

merase,the enzyme that adds nucleotides to a strand of DNA. In addition,a small

amount of the -dideoxynucleoside triphosphate of one of the bases is added to the

reaction mixture. A -dideoxynucleoside triphosphate has no OH groups at the 

and -positions.Nucleotides will be added to the primer by base pairing with the restriction frag-
ment. Synthesis will stop if the -dideoxy analog of dATP is added instead of

dATP,because the -dideoxy analog does not have a to which additional

nucleotides can be added. Therefore,three different chain-terminated fragments will

be obtained from the DNA restriction fragment shown here.
The procedure is repeated three more times using a -dideoxy analog of dGTP,
then a -dideoxy analog of dCTP,and then a -dideoxy analog of dTTP.
PROBLEM 26What labeled fragments would be obtained from the segment of DNA shown above if a
-dideoxy analog of dGTP had been added to the reaction mixture instead of a -
dideoxy analog of dATP?
2,32,32,32,32,3dATP, dGTP,dCTP, dTTP,2,3-dATPDNA polymerase5332PAGGCTCCAGTGATCCGTC32PTCCGA32PTCCGAGGTCA32PTCCGAGGTCACTADNA to be sequencedprimer3-OH2,32,3a 2,3-dideoxynucleoside triphosphateOOOOPOOOOPOPObaseO32-2,32,3232P,5-endBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 060
Section 27.16Laboratory Synthesis of DNA Strands
061The chain-terminated fragments obtained from each of the four experiments are
loaded onto separate lanes of a buffered polyacrylamide gel
Ñthe fragments obtainedfrom using a -dideoxy analog of dATP are loaded onto one lane,the fragments

obtained from using a -dideoxy analog of dGTP onto another lane,and so on. An

electric field is applied across the ends of the gel,causing the negatively charged frag-

ments to travel toward the positively charged electrode (the anode). The smaller frag-

ments fit through the spaces in the gel relatively easily and therefore travel through the

gel faster,while the larger fragments pass through the gel more slowly.
After the fragments have been separated,the gel is placed in contact with a photo-
graphic plate. Radiation from causes a dark spot to appear on the plate opposite the

location of each labeled fragment in the gel. This technique is called autoradiography,

and the exposed photographic plate is known as an 
autoradiograph(Figure27.18).
The sequence of bases in the original restriction fragment can be read directly fromthe autoradiograph. The identity of each base is determined by noting the column

where each successive dark spot (larger piece of labeled fragment) appears,starting at

the bottom of the gel. The sequence of the fragment of DNA responsible for the au-

toradiograph in Figure27.18is shown on the left-hand side of the figure.
Once the sequence of bases in a restriction fragment is determined,the results can
be checked by determining the base sequence of the complementary strand. The base

sequence in the original piece of DNA can be determined by repeating the entire pro-

cedure with a different restriction endonuclease and noting overlapping fragments.
32P2,32,3GGCT
ATAACGTA
ATCACAGTCAGCT
TACGACFigure 27.18
An autoradiograph.DNA FINGERPRINTINGThe base sequence of the human genome varies
from individual to individual,generally by a sin-
gle base change every few hundred base pairs. Because some of

these changes occur in base sequences recognized by restriction

endonucleases,the fragments formed when human DNA reacts

with a particular restriction endonuclease vary in size depend-

ing on the individual. It is this variation that forms the basis of

DNA fingerprinting (also called DNA profiling or DNA typ-

ing). This technique is used by forensic chemists to compare

DNA samples collected at the scene of a crime with the DNA of

the suspected perpetrator. The most powerful technique for

DNA identification analyzes restriction fragment length poly-
morphisms (RFLPs) obtained from regions of DNA in which
individual variations are most common. This technique takes

four to six weeks and requires a blood stain about the size of a
dime. The chance of identical results from two different per-

sons is thought to be one in a million. The second type of DNA

profiling uses a polymerase chain reaction (PCR),which ampli-

fies a specific region of DNA and compares differences at that

site among individuals. This technique can be done in less than

a week and requires only 1% of the amount required for RFLP,

but does not discriminate as well among individuals. The

chance of identical results from two different people is 1 in 500

to 1 in 2000. DNA fingerprinting is also being used to establish

paternity,accounting for about 100,000 DNA profiles a year.
99990000%%%%27.16Laboratory Synthesis of DNA StrandsThere is a great deal of interest in the synthesis of oligonucleotides with specific base
sequences. This would allow scientists to synthesize genes that could be inserted into

the DNA of microorganisms,causing the organisms to synthesize a particular protein.

Alternatively,a synthetic gene could be inserted into the DNA of an organism defec-

tive in that gene
Ña process known as 
gene therapy.Synthesizing an oligonucleotide with a particular base sequence is an even more
challenging task than synthesizing a polypeptide with a specific amino acid sequence

because each nucleotide has several groups that must be protected and then deprotect-

ed at the proper times. The approach taken was to develop an automated method

similar to automated peptide synthesis (Section23.10). The growing nucleotide is at-

tached to a solid support so that it can be purified by flushing the reaction container

with an appropriate solvent. Therefore,none of the synthesized product will be lost

during purification.
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 061
062CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsPhosphoramidite MonomersOne current method synthesizes oligonucleotides using phosphoramidite monomers.The group of each phosphoramidite monomer is attached to a 
para
-dimethoxytrityl (DMTr) protecting group. The particular group (Pr) used to protect the

base depends on the base.The of the oligonucleotide to be synthesized is attached to a controlled-
pore glass solid support and the oligonucleotide is synthesized from the When a

monomer is added to the nucleoside attached to the solid support,the only nucleophile

in the reaction mixture is the group of the sugar bonded to the solid support.

Thisnucleophile attacks the phosphorus of the phosphoramidite,displacing the amine

and forming a phosphite. The amine is too strong a base to be expelled without being

protonated. Protonated tetrazole is the acid used for protonation because it is strong
enough to protonate the diisopropylamine leaving group,but not strong enough to re-

move the DMTr protecting group. The phosphite is oxidized to a phosphate using 

ortert-butylhydroperoxide. The DMTr protecting group on the of the dinu-
cleotide is removed with mild acid. The cycle of (1)monomer addition,(2)oxidation,

and (3)deprotection with acid is repeated over and over until a polymer of the desired

length and sequence is obtained. Notice that the DNA polymer is synthesized in the
direction,which is opposite to the direction DNA is synthe-
sized in nature.(53)355-endI25-OH3-end.3-nucleoside5-OH3-D Molecule:PhosphoramiditeOORCCNRONR
2PONDMTrCH
3OOCH3OPPrbaseODMTra phosphoramiditea phosphoramidite monomerused foroligonucleotide synthesisOOONNbaseOOHObasePrPrPCmonomersolid supportHtetrazoleOOOONDMTrODMTrbaseOOObasePrPrPCa phosphitesolid supportI2BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 062
Section 27.16Laboratory Synthesis of DNA Strands
063Tutorial:
Oligonucleotide synthesis
with phosphoramiditesOOONbaseOOOObasePrPrPCsolid supportOOOHONbaseOOOObasePrPrPCsolid supportOOOHONbaseOOOObasePrPrPCOONOOObasePr
PCsolid supportOOOONbaseOOOObasePrPrPCOONOOObasePr
PCsolid supportH1.  new monomer     HÐÐtetrazole2.  I23.  Hchain extensionOa phosphateDMTrBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 063
064CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsThe groups of cytosine,adenine,and guanine are nucleophiles and therefore
must be protected to prevent them from reacting with a newly added monomer. The
groups of cytosine and adenine are protected as benzamides and the group
of guanine is protected as a butanamide. Thymine does not contain any nucleophilic
groups,so it does not have to be protected.
After the oligonucleotide is synthesized,the protecting groups on the phosphates
and the protecting groups on the bases must be removed,and the oligonucleotide has

to be detached from the solid support. This can all be done in a single step using aque-

ous ammonia. Because a hydrogen bonded to a carbon adjacent to a cyano group is

relatively acidic (Section19.1),ammonia can be used as the base in the elimination re-

action that removes the phosphate protecting group.
Currently,automated DNA synthesizers can synthesize nucleic acids containing as
many as 130 nucleotides in acceptable yields,adding one nucleotide every 2 to 3 min-

utes. Longer nucleic acids can be prepared by splicing together two or more individu-

ally prepared strands. To ensure a good overall yield of oligonucleotide,the addition

of each monomer must occur in high yield This can be accomplished by

using a large excess of monomer. This,however,makes oligonucleotide synthesis very

expensive because the unreacted monomers are wasted.
H-Phosphonate MonomersA second method for synthesizing oligonucleotides with specific base sequences,

using H-phosphonate monomers,has the advantage over the phosphoramidite

method in that the monomers are easier to handle and phosphate protecting groups(98%).ORCNHHNH3NH4ORPOOORORPOOCNNH2NH2NNNNNNOOOH2NN
NHNHNNOONHNNHNNNNNNNunprotected basesprotected bases
CH3CH2CH2CClOCClOCClOCH3CH2CH2CHClHClONCHNHClOCcytosineadenineguanineNH2NH2NH2BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:59 PM  Page 064Section 27.16Laboratory Synthesis of DNA Strands
065are not needed. However,the yields are not as good. The H-phosphonate monomers
are activated by reacting with an acyl chloride,which converts them into phosphoan-

hydrides. The group of the nucleoside attached to the solid support reacts with

the phosphoanhydride,forming a dimer. The DMTr protecting group is removed

with acid under mild conditions,and a second activated monomer is added.

Monomers are added one at a time in this way until the strand is complete. Oxidation

with (or tert-butyl hydroperoxide) converts the H-phosphonate groups to phos-
phate groups. The base-protecting groups are removed by aqueous ammonia as in the

phosphoramidite method.I25-OHOOOOODMTrbasePr
an H-phosphonateactivated monomersolid supportsolid supportPHOOOOODMTrbasePr
OObasePr
PHsolid supportOOOObasePr
OObasePr
PHOOOOOODMTrbasePr
OObasePr
PHRCCl
OCRHOHOsolid supportOOOObasePr
OObasePr
PHOOOObasePr
PHHOHchain extension1.   activated monomer2.   H5-OH groupa phosphoanhydrideBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 065
066CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsNotice that in the phosphoramidite method an oxidation is done each time amonomer is added,whereas in the H-phosphonate method a single oxidation is carried

out after the entire strand has been synthesized.PROBLEM 27Propose a mechanism for removal of the DMTr protecting group by treatment with acid.
27.17Rational Drug DesignCertain diseases such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and herpes are
caused by retroviruses
. The genetic information of a retrovirus is contained in its
RNA. The retrovirus uses the sequence of bases in RNA as a template to synthesize

DNA. It is called a retrovirus because its genetic information flows from RNA to DNA

instead of the more typical flow from DNA to RNA.
Drugs that interfere with the synthesis of DNA by retroviruses have been designed
and developed. If the retrovirus cannot synthesize DNA,it cannot take over the ge-

netic machinery of the cell to produce more retroviral RNA and retroviral proteins.

Designing drugs with particular structures to achieve specific purposes is called

rational drug design. AZT is perhaps the best known of the drugs designed to inter-
fere with retroviral DNA synthesis. AZT is taken up by the T lymphocytes,cells that

are particularly susceptible to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),the retrovirus

that causes AIDS. Once in the cell,AZTis converted to AZT-triphosphate. The retro-

viral enzyme (reverse transcriptase) that catalyzes DNA formation from RNA binds

AZT-triphosphate more tightly than it binds dTTP. Therefore,AZT rather than T is

added to the growing DNA chain. Because AZT does not have a group,no ad-

ditional nucleotides can be added to the chain and DNA synthesis comes to a sudden

halt. Fortunately,the concentration of AZT required to affect reverse transcription is

too low to affect most cellular DNA replication. A newer drug,-dideoxyinosine

(ddI),has a similar mechanism of action. Rational drug design is further discussed in

Chapter30.
2,33-OHphosphategroupH-phosphonate
groupsolid supportOOOObasePr
OObasePr
POOOOObasePr
PHHsolid supportOOOObasePr
OObasePr
POOOOObasePr
POOI2BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 066
Figure 27.19
A triple helix. A synthetic strand ofoligonucleotides (purple atoms) is
wrapped around double-stranded
DNA.Section 27.17Rational Drug Design
0673-D Molecule:AZTBecause viruses,bacteria,and cancer cells all require DNA to grow and reproduce,
chemists are trying to design compounds that will bind to the DNA of invading organ-

isms and interfere with their reproduction. Chemists are also attempting to design
polymers that will bind to specific sequences of human DNA. Such compounds could

disrupt the expression of a gene (interfere with its transcription into RNA). For exam-

ple,there is hope that compounds can be designed that will interfere with the expres-

sion of genes that contribute to the development of cancer. Polymers that bind to DNA

are called antigene agents
; those that bind to mRNA are called 
antisense agents
.For a compound to target a particular gene,the compound must be able to recognize
a specific sequence of 15 to 20 bases. A sequence that long might occur only once in

the human genome,so the compound would be specific for a particular site on DNA.

In contrast,if the compound recognizes a sequence of only six bases,it could affect

the human genome at more than a million locations because that sequence could occur

once in every 2000 bases. However,since only 10% of the genes are expressed in most

cells,a compound that recognizes a specific sequence of 10 to 12 bases may confer a

gene-specific effect.
One approach to site-specific recognition
uses a synthetic strand of oligonu-cleotides. When a strand of oligonucleotides is added to natural double-stranded DNA,

the strand wraps around the DNA,forming a triple helix(Figure27.19). The hope is

that if the DNA sequence of a particular gene is known,a deoxyribonucleotide can be

synthesized that will bind to that gene.A triple helix is formed through Hoogsteen base pairing
between the existing base
pairs in DNA and bases in the third synthetic strand. In 
Hoogsteen base pairing,a T
in the synthetic strand binds to an A of an AT base pair,and a protonated cytosine in

the synthetic strand binds to a G of a GC base pair (Figure27.20). Thus,oligonu-

cleotides can be prepared with sequences that will base-pair to the sense strand ofOOOOOCH3NHNNNNHONNHNN2,3-dideoxyinosineddI3-azido-2-deoxythymidineAZTHO3-D Molecule:Triple helix
NHCH3NNHHHNNOOOCH3NNOONNNONHHHNNNNONHNNNNHHHHthymineÐadenine base pairT in a synthetic strandCH in a synthetic strandcytosineÐguanine base pairsugarsugarsugarsugarFigure 27.20
Hoogsteen base pairing: A T in asynthetic strand of oligonucleotides
binds to the A of an base pair

in double-stranded DNA; 
a protonated in the

synthetic strand binds to the G of abase pair in DNA.GCC (CH)ATBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 067
OOPObaseOOPObaseOOOPOSSSbaseOOOFigure 27.21
A synthetic oligonucleotide withnegatively charged sulfurs in place
of negatively charged oxygens.068CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic AcidsDNA at the desired location. Several methods are being investigated that will cut out
the piece of targeted DNA after the synthetic strand binds to the double helix.
A problem with using synthetic oligonucleotides to target DNA is that the synthetic
strands are susceptible to enzymes,such as restriction endonucleases,that catalyze the

hydrolysis of DNA. Consequently,other polymers are being designed that will recognize

specific DNA sequences but will not be enzymatically hydrolyzed. A compound that has

shown some promise is a polymer of phosphorothioates. The polymer differs from DNA

in that the negatively charged oxygen bonded to the phosphorus is replaced by a

negatively charged sulfur (Figure27.21). The polymer binds to both DNA and RNA

with complementary base pairing. Oligonucleotide phosphorothioates consisting of
various lengths of deoxycytidine residues have recently been found to be effective in

protecting T cells from the HIV virus.
PROBLEM 285-Bromouracil,a highly mutagenic compound,is used in cancer chemotherapy. When ad-
ministered to a patient,it is converted to the triphosphate and incorporated into DNA in

place of thymine,which it resembles sterically. Why does it cause mutations? (
Hint:The
bromo substituent increases the stability of the enol tautomer.)
NHNH5-bromouracilHNOBrOthymineHNOCH3OSummaryThere are two types of nucleic acids
Ñdeoxyribonucleicacid (DNA)
and ribonucleic acid (RNA)
. DNA encodes an
organism
Õs hereditary information and controls the growth
and division of cells. In most organisms the genetic infor-

mation stored in DNA is 
transcribedinto RNA. This 
information can then be translatedfor the synthesis of allthe proteins needed for cellular structure and function.ATP is a cell
Õs most important source of chemical energy;
ATP provides a reaction pathway involving a good leaving

group for a reaction that would not otherwise occur because

of a poor leaving group. This occurs by way of a 
phosphoryltransfer reaction
in which a phosphate-containing group of
ATP is transferred to a nucleophile as a result of breaking a

phosphoanhydride bond
. The reaction involves one of three
intermediatesÑan acyl phosphate,an 
acyl pyrophosphate
,or an acyl adenylate. Cleavage of a phosphoanhydride bond
is highly exergonic because of electrostatic repulsions,solva-

tion,and electron delocalization
A nucleosidecontains a base bonded to D-ribose or to 2-deoxy-D-ribose. A nucleotideis a nucleoside with either theor the group bonded to phosphoric acid by an ester
linkage. Nucleic acidsare composed of long strands of nu-cleotide subunits linked by phosphodiester bonds. These link-

ages join the group of one nucleotide to the 5
-OH3-OH3-OH5-group of the next nucleotide. A 
dinucleotidecontains two
nucleotide subunits,an 
oligonucleotidecontains three to tensubunits,and a 
polynucleotidecontains many subunits. DNA
contains -deoxy-D-ribose while RNA contains 
D-ribose.The difference in the sugars causes DNA to be stable and

RNA to be easily cleaved.
The primary structure
of a nucleic acid is the sequenceof bases in its strand. DNA contains 
A,G,C,and 
T; RNA
contains A,G,C,and 
U. RNA has thymine instead of uracil
to prevent mutations caused by imine hydrolysis of C to form

U. DNA is a double-stranded helix with a major and a minor

groove; the strands run in opposite directions and are twisted

into a helix. The bases are confined to the inside of the helix

and the sugar and phosphate groups are on the outside. The

strands are held together by hydrogen bonds between bases

of opposing strands as well as by stacking interactionsÑvan der Waals attractions between adjacent bases on the same

strand. The two strands
Ñone is called a sense strandand theother a template strandÑare complementary:Apairs withT,and 
Gpairs with C. DNA is synthesized in the 
direction by a process called semiconservative replication
.The sequence of bases in DNA provides the blueprint
for the synthesis (transcription) of RNA. RNA is synthe-
sized in the direction by transcribing the DNA
53532AU:delete prime here?
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 068
Problems069template strand in the direction. There are three
kinds of RNA:messenger RNA,ribosomal RNA,and trans-

fer RNA. Protein synthesis (
translation) takes place from
the N-terminal end to the C-terminal end by reading the

bases along the mRNA strand in the direction.

Each three-base sequenceÑa codonÑspecifies the particu-
lar amino to be incorporated into a protein. A tRNA carries

the amino acid bound as an ester to its -terminal position.

The codons and the amino acids they specify are known as

the genetic code.35335Restriction endonucleasescleave DNA at specific palin-
dromes forming restriction fragments
. The dideoxymethodis the preferred method to determine the sequence ofbases in the restriction fragments. Oligonucleotides with spe-
cific base sequences can be synthesized using phosphor-

amidite monomers or H-phosphonate monomers. Polymers
that bind to DNA are called antigene agents; those that bind

to RNA are called antisense agents.
Key Terms
acyl adenylate (p.040)
acyl phosphate (p.039)

acyl pyrophosphate (p.040)

adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (p.036)

anticodon (p.052)

antisense strand (p.050)

autoradiograph (p.061)

base (p.032)

codon (p.054)

deamination (p.058)

deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (p.032)

deoxyribonucleotide (p.035)

dideoxy method (p.060)

dinucleotide (p.044)

double helix (p.047)

eukaryotic organism (p.051)

exon (p.051)

gene (p.050)

gene therapy (p.061)

genetic code (p.054)

high-energy bond (p.041)
Hoogsteen base pairing (p.067)
human genome (p.050)

informational strand (p.050)

intron (p.051)

major groove (p.048)

messenger RNA (mRNA) (p.051)

minor groove (p.048)

nucleic acid (p.032)

nucleoside (p.034)

nucleotide (p.035)

oligonucleotide (p.044)

phosphoanhydride bond (p.037)

phosphodiester (p.032)

phosphoryl transfer reaction (p.038)

polynucleotide (p.044)

primary structure (p.044)

prokaryotic organism (p.051)

promoter site (p.050)

rational drug design (p.066)

replication (p.050)

replication fork (p.050)
restriction endonuclease (p.059)
restriction fragment (p.059)

retrovirus (p.066)

ribonucleic acid (RNA) (p.032)

ribonucleotide (p.035)

ribosomal RNA (rRNA) (p.051)

ribosome (p.051)

ribozyme (p.051)

RNA splicing (p.051)

sedimentation constant (p.052)

semiconservative replication (p.050)

sense strand (p.050)

site-specific recognition (p.067)

stacking interactions (p.047)

stop codon (p.054)

template strand (p.050)

transcription (p.050)

transfer RNA (tRNA) (p.051)

translation (p.054)
Problems
29.Name the following compounds:
30.What nonapeptide is coded for by the following piece of mRNA?
31.What would be the base sequence of the segment of DNA that is responsible for the biosynthesis of the following hexapeptide?
Gly-Ser-Arg-Val-His-Glu5AAAGUUGGCUACCCCGGAAUGGUGGUC3Od.OOCH3NHNHOHOOc.NNNNNH2HOOOOOPOb.NH2ONNHOOH
OOOOOPOPOOa.NNHNH2NNOOHHOOOPOOAU:Please check Key Term on page 036
BRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 069
34.Using the single-letter abbreviations for the amino acids in Table23.1,write the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide
represented by the first four letters in your first name. Do not use any letter twice. (Because not all letters are assigned to
 aminoacids,you might have to use one or two letters in your last name.) Write the sequence of bases in mRNA that would result in the

synthesis of that polypeptide. Write the sequence of bases in the sense strand of DNA that would result in formation of the

appropriate mRNA.
35.Which of the following pairs of dinucleotides are present in equal amounts in DNA?
a.CC and GGc.CA and TGe.GT and CA

b.CG and GTd.CG and ATf.TA and AT
36.Why is the codon a triplet rather than a doublet or a quartet?

37.RNAase,the enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of RNA,has two catalytically active histidine residues at its active site. O
ne ofthe histidine residues is catalytically active in its acidic form and the other is catalytically active in its basic form. Prop
ose amechanism for RNAase.
38.The amino acid sequences of peptide fragments obtained from a normal protein and from the same protein synthesized by a
defective gene were compared. They were found to differ in only one peptide fragment. The primary sequences of the fragments

are shown here.
a.What is the defect in DNA?
b.It was later determined that the normal peptide fragment is an octapeptide with a C-terminal Val-Leu. What is the C-terminal
amino acid of the mutant peptide?39.Whether the mechanism requiring activation of a carboxylate ion by ATP involves attack of the carboxylate ion on the 
-phosphorus or the -phosphorus of ATP cannot be determined from the reaction products because AMP and pyrophosphate are
obtained as products in both mechanisms. The mechanisms,however,can be distinguished by a labeling experiment in which the

enzyme,the carboxylate ion,ATP,and radioactively labeled pyrophosphate are incubated,and the ATP is isolated. If the isolated

ATP is radioactive,the mechanism involves attack on the -phosphorus. If it is not radioactive,the mechanism involves attack 

on the -phosphorus. Explain these conclusions.
40.What would be the results of the experiment in Problem39 if radioactive AMP were added to the incubation mixture instead of
radioactive pyrophosphate?
41.Which cytosine in the following sense strand of DNA could cause the most damage to the organism if it were deaminated?
42.Sodium nitrite,a common food preservative (p.000),is capable of causing mutations in an acidic environment by converting
cytosines to uracils. Explain how this occurs.
43.The first amino acid incorporated into a polypeptide chain during its biosynthesis in prokaryotes is 
N-formylmethionine. Explainthe purpose of the formyl group.5ATGTCGCTAATC3babaMutant: 
Gln-Ser-Glu-Pro-Gly-ThrNormal: Gln-Tyr-Gly-Thr-Arg-Tyr-Val070CHAPTER 27Nucleosides, Nucleotides, and Nucleic Acids32.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
33.Match the codon with the anticodon:
OOOCCH2CH2CHCONH3ATPOONH3NH3OOHH2NCCH2CH2CHCOADPOOPCodonAnticodon
AAAACC
GCACCU

CUUUUU
AGGAGG
CCUUGA
GGUAAG
UCAGUC
GACUGC
X-refBRUI27-32_70r2  26-02-2003  3:51 PM  Page 070
071In previous chapters,
the polymers synthe-sized by biological systemsÑproteins,carbohydrates,

and nucleic acidsÑwere discussed.Chapter 28discusses polymers synthesized by chemists.
These synthetic polymers have physical properties that

make them useful in everyday life,in applications such as

fabrics,bottles,food wrap,automobile parts,and compact

discs.Chapter 29discusses pericyclic reactionsÑreactions that
occur as a result of a cyclic reorganization of electrons. 

In this chapter,you will learn how the conservation of

orbital symmetry theory explains the relationships among

reactant,product,and reaction conditions in a pericyclic

reaction.Chapter 30introduces you to medicinal chemistry. Here
you will see how many of our commonly used drugs were

discovered,and you will learn about some of the tech-

niques used to develop new drugs.
Special Topics
in OrganicChemistryPARTEIGHT
Chapter 28Synthetic PolymersChapter 29Pericyclic ReactionsChapter 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsDiscovery and DesignBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 071
Super glueProbablyno group of
synthetic compounds
is more important to modern
life than synthetic polymers. A

polymeris a large molecule made
by linking together repeating units of small

molecules called monomers. The process of
linking them together is called polymerization.07228Synthetic Polymersethylene monomerspolyethylene
MMMMMMnMMMMpolymerizationmonomerpolymer
Unlike small organic molecules,which are of interest because of their 
chemical
properties,these giant molecules are interesting because of their 
physicalproperties,which make them useful in everyday life. Some synthetic polymers resemble natural

substances,but most are quite different from those found in nature. Such diverse items

as photographic film,compact discs,rugs,food wrap,artificial joints,Super glue,

toys,bottles,weather stripping,automobile body parts,shoe soles,and condoms are

made of synthetic polymers.Polymers can be divided into two broad groups:
synthetic polymersandbiopolymers(natural polymers). Synthetic polymers are synthesized by scientists,
whereas biopolymers are synthesized by organisms. Examples of biopolymers are
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 072
Section 28.1General Classes of Synthetic Polymers
073Alexander Parke (1813Ð1890)
wasborn in Birmingham,England. He

called the polymer that he invented

Òpyroxylin.ÓHe was,however,

unable to market it.
The inventor 
John Wesley Hyatt
(1837Ð1920)was born in New York.
When a New York firm offered a prize

of $10,000 for a substitute for ivory
billiard balls,Hyatt improved the

synthesis of pyroxylin. He changed its

name to ÒcelluloidÓand patented a

method for making billiard balls. He

did not,however,win the prize.
Louis-Marie-Hilaire Bernigaud,
Comte de Chardonnet (1839Ð1924)
was born in France. In the early

stages of his career,he was an

assistant to Louis Pasteur. Because

the rayon he initially produced was

made from nitrocellulose,it was

dangerously flammable. Eventually,

chemists learned to remove some of

the nitro groups after the fiber was

formed,which made the fiber much

less flammable but not as strong.
Hermann Staudinger (1881Ð1965),the son of a professor,was born in

Germany. He became a professor at

the Technical Institute of Karlsruhe

and at the University of Freiburg. He

received the Nobel Prize in chemistry

in 1953 for his contributions to

polymer chemistry.
Chain-growth polymers are also called
addition polymers.DNA,the storage molecule for genetic information
Ñthe molecule that determineswhether a fertilized egg becomes a human or a honeybee; RNA and proteins,the mol-

ecules that induce biochemical transformations; and polysaccharides. The structures

and properties of these molecules are presented in other chapters. In this chapter,we

will explore synthetic polymers.
Humans first relied on 
natural polymers
for clothing,wrapping themselves in
animal skins and furs. Later,they learned to spin natural fibers into thread and to

weave the thread into cloth. Today,much of our clothing is made of 
synthetic polymers
(e.g.,nylon,polyester,polyacrylonitrile). Many people prefer clothing made of natur-

al polymers (e.g.,cotton,wool,silk),but it has been estimated that if synthetic poly-

mers were not available,all the arable land in the United States would have to be used

for the production of cotton and wool for clothing.
The first 
plasticÑa polymer capable of being moldedÑwas celluloid. Invented in
1856 by Alexander Parke,it was a mixture of nitrocellulose and camphor. Celluloid

was used in the manufacture of billiard balls and piano keys,replacing scarce ivory.

The invention of celluloid provided a reprieve for many elephants,but caused some

moments of consternation in billiard parlors because nitrocellulose is flammable and
explosive. Celluloid was used for motion picture film until it was replaced by cellulose

acetate,a less dangerous polymer.
The first synthetic fiber was rayon. In 1865,the French silk industry was threatened
by an epidemic that killed many silkworms,highlighting the need for an artificial silk

substitute. Louis Chardonnet accidentally discovered the starting material for a syn-

thetic fiber when,while wiping up some spilled nitrocellulose from a table,he noticed

long silklike strands adhering to both the cloth and the table. 
ÒChardonnet silkÓwas
introduced at the Paris Exposition in 1891. It was called 
rayon
because it was so shiny
that it appeared to give off rays of light.
The first synthetic rubber was synthesized by German chemists in 1917. Their
efforts were in response to a severe shortage of raw materials as a result of blockading

during World War I.
Hermann Staudinger was the first to recognize that the various polymers being
produced were not disorderly conglomerates of monomers,but were made up of

chains of monomers joined together. Today,the synthesis of polymers has grown from

a process carried out with little chemical understanding to a sophisticated science in
which molecules are engineered with predetermined specifications in order to produce

new materials tailored to fit human needs. Recent examples of the many new polymers

that are constantly being designed include Lycra
¨,a fabric with elastic properties,and
Dyneema¨,the strongest fabric commercially available.
Polymer chemistry
is part of the larger discipline of 
materials science,which
involves the creation of new materials to replace metals,glass,ceramics,fabrics,

wood,cardboard,and paper. Polymer chemistry has evolved into a multibillion-dollar

industry. Currently,there are approximately 30,000 patented polymers in the United

States. More than kilograms of synthetic polymers are produced in the

United States each year,and we can expect many more new materials to be developed

by scientists in the years to come.28.1General Classes of Synthetic PolymersSynthetic polymers can be divided into two major classes,depending on their method
of preparation. Chain-growth polymers
,also known as 
addition polymers,are made
by chain reactions
Ñthe addition of monomers to the end of a growing chain. The end
of the chain is reactive because it is a radical,a cation,or an anion. Polystyrene
Ñusedfor disposable food containers,insulation,and toothbrush handles,among other

thingsÑis an example of a chain-growth polymer. Polystyrene is pumped full of air to
produce the material known as Styrofoam
¨.2.51013Chain-growth polymers are made by
chain reactions.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 073
074CHAPTER 28Synthetic Polymers3-D Molecules:Styrene; PolystyreneStep-growth polymers
,also called 
condensation polymers,are made by combin-
ing two molecules while,in most cases,removing a small molecule,generally water or

an alcohol. The reacting molecules have reactive functional groups at each end. Unlike

chain-growth polymerization,which requires the individual molecules to add to the

end of a growing chain,step-growth polymerization allows any two reactive molecules

to combine. Dacron¨is an example of a step-growth polymer.
Dacron¨is the most common of the group of polymers known as 
polyesters
Ñpolymers with many ester groups. Polyesters are used for clothing and are responsible

for the wrinkle-resistant behavior of many fabrics. Polyester is also used to make the

plastic film called Mylar
¨,needed in the manufacture of magnetic recording tape. This
film is tear-resistant and,when processed,has a tensile strength nearly as great as that

of steel. Aluminized Mylar
¨was used to make the Echo satellite that was put into orbit
around the Earth as a giant reflector. The polymer used to make soft drink bottles is

also a polyester.
28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
The monomers used most commonly in chain-growth polymerization are ethylene
(ethene) and substituted ethylenes. In the chemical industry,monosubstituted ethylenes

are known as 
alpha olefins
. Polymers formed from ethylene or substituted ethylenes arecalled vinyl polymers. Some of the many vinyl polymers synthesized by chain-growth
polymerization are listed in Table28.1.
Chain-growth polymerization proceeds by one of three mechanisms:
radicalpolymerization,cationic polymerization,or 
anionic polymerization. Each mech-anism has three distinct phases:an 
initiation stepthat starts the polymerization,propagation steps
that allow the chain to grow,and 
termination stepsthat stop thegrowth of the chain. We will see that the choice of mechanism depends on the struc-

ture of the monomer andthe initiator used to activate the monomer.
Radical PolymerizationFor chain-growth polymerization to occur by a radical mechanism,a radical initiator
must be added to the monomer to convert some of the monomer molecules into

radicals. The initiator breaks homolytically into radicals,and each radical adds to an

alkene monomer,converting it into a radical. This radical reacts with another

monomer,adding a new subunit that propagates the chain. The radical site is now at

the end of the most recent unit added to the end of the chain. This is called the

propagating site
.repeating unitstyrenepolystyrene
a chain-growth polymerCH2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHnStep-growth polymers are also called
condensation polymers.ndimethyl terephthalate1,2-ethanediolpoly(ethylene terephthalate)
Dacrona step-growth polymerCH3OOCH
3HOCH2CH2OHCOC2n CH3OHOOCH2CH2OOCH
2CH2OCOCOrepeating unitBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 074
Section 28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
075Table 28.1Some Important Chain-Growth Polymers and Their Uses
MonomerRepeating unitPolymer nameUses
polyethylenefilm,toys,bottles,plastic bags
poly(vinyl chloride)
ÒsqueezeÓbottles,pipe,siding,
flooringpolypropylenemolded caps,margarine tubs,
indoor/outdoor carpeting,upholstery
polystyrenepackaging,toys,clear cups,
egg cartons,hot drink cups
poly(tetrafluoroethylene)nonsticking surfaces,liners,
Teflon
¨cable insulationpoly(acrylonitrile)rugs,blankets,yarn,apparel,
Orlon¨,Acrilan
¨simulated furpoly(methyl methacrylate)lighting fixtures,signs,
Plexiglas
¨,Lucite
¨solar panels,skylights
poly(vinyl acetate)latex paints,adhesives
CH2CHOOCCH3CH2CHOOCCH3CH2COCOCH3CH3CH2CH3COCOCH3CH2CHCNCH2CHCNCF2CF2CF2CF2CH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH3CH2CHCH3CH2CHClCH2CHClCH2CH2CH2CH2RECYCLING SYMBOLSWhen plastics are recycled,the various types
must be separated from one another. To aid in the
separation,many states require manufacturers to include a

recycling symbol on their products to indicate the type of

plastic. You are probably familiar with these symbols,which

are found on the bottom of plastic containers. The symbols

consist of three arrows around one of seven numbers; an

abbreviation below the symbol indicates the type of polymer

from which the container is made. The lower the number in

the middle of the symbol,the greater is the ease with which

the material can be recycled:1 (PET) stands for poly(ethylene

terephthalate),2 (HDPE) for high-density polyethylene,3 (V)

for poly(vinyl chloride),4 (LDPE) for low-density polyeth-

ylene,5 (PP) for polypropylene,6 (PS) for polystyrene,and 7

for all other plastics.Recycling labelsBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 075
076CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersThis process is repeated over and over. Hundreds or even thousands of alkene
monomers can add one at a time to the growing chain. Eventually,the chain reaction

stops because the propagating sites are destroyed. Propagating sites can be destroyed

when two chains combine at their propagating sites; when two chains undergo

disproportionation
,with one chain being oxidized to an alkene and the other being re-
duced to an alkane; or when a chain reacts with an impurity that consumes the radical.Thus,radical polymerizations
have chain-initiating,chain-propagating,and chain-
terminating steps similar to the steps that take place in the radical reactions

discussed in Sections4.10and 9.2.
As long as the polymer has a high molecular weight,the groups at the ends of the
polymer are relatively unimportant in determining its physical properties and are gen-

erally not even specified; it is the rest of the molecule that determines the properties of

the polymer.
The molecular weight of the polymer can be controlled by a process known as
chain transfer. In chain transfer,the growing chain reacts with a molecule XY in a
manner that allows to terminate the chain,leaving behind to initiate a new

chain. XY can be a solvent,a radical initiator,or any molecule with a bond that can be

cleaved homolytically.
nCH2XYCH2CHCH
2CHnCH2YCH2CHCH
2CHXZZZZYXthree ways to terminate the chainchain combinationCHnnn
2 RORO
CH2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHZCH2CHCHCH2CHCH2ORdisproportionationnn2 RORO
CH2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
reaction with an impuritynROimpurityCH2CHCH
2CHimpurity
nROCH
2CHCH
2CH2ZZZnROCH
2CHCH
2CHZZZZ
ZZZZ
ZZZZ
propagating siteschain-propagating stepsROCH2CHROCH
2CHCH2CHCH2ZZZZZZZZZZCHROCH2CHCH2CHROCH
2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHetc.chain-initiating stepsa radical initiatorradicals
ORRO2 RO
ROCH
2CHROCH
2CHZZthe alkene monomerreacts with a radicalBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 076
Section 28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
077Chain-growth polymerization of monosubstituted ethylenes exhibits a marked pref-
erence for head-to-tail addition,where the head of one monomer is attached to the
tail of another.
Head-to-tail addition of a substituted ethylene results in a polymer in which every
other carbon bears a substituent.Head-to-tail addition is favored for steric reasons because the propagating site prefer-
entially attacks the less sterically hindered unsubstituted carbon of the alkene.

Groups that stabilize radicals also favor head-to-tail addition. For example,when Z is

a phenyl substituent,the benzene ring stabilizes the radical by electron delocalization,

so the propagating site is the carbon that bears the phenyl substituent.
In cases where Z is smallÑwhich makes steric considerations less important
Ñand isless able to stabilize the growing end of the chain by electron delocalization,some

head-to-head addition and some tail-to-tail addition also occur. This has been observed

primarily in situations where Z is fluorine. Abnormal addition,however,has never

been found to constitute more than 10% of the overall chain.
Monomers that most readily undergo chain-growth polymerization by a radical
mechanism are those in which the substituent Z is able to stabilize the growing radi-

cal species by electron delocalization. Examples of monomers that undergo radical

polymerization are shown in Table28.2.
CH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHsp2poly(vinyl chloride)vinyl chlorideCH2CHClClClClClClClCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHtailhead-to-tailhead-to-headtail-to-tail
headCH2CHZCH2CHCH2CHZZCH2CHCHCH2ZZCHCH2CH2CHZZ3-D Molecules:Vinyl chloride; 

Poly(vinyl chloride)Table 28.2
Examples of Alkenes That Undergo Radical PolymerizationCH2CHCH2CHClCH2CHOCCH3OCH2CHCNCH2styrene
vinyl chloridevinyl acetateacrylonitrilemethyl methacrylate1,3-butadieneCCH3COCH3OCH2CHCHCH
2BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 077
A common feature of all radical initiators is a relatively weak bond that readily un-
dergoes homolytic cleavage. In all but one of the radical initiators shown in Table28.3,

the weak bond is an oxygenÐoxygen bond. Two factors enter into the choice of radical
initiator for a particular chain-growth polymerization. The first is the desired solubili-

ty of the initiator. For example,potassium persulfate is often used if the initiator needs

to be soluble in water,whereas an initiator with several carbons is chosen if the initia-

tor must be soluble in a nonpolar solvent. The second factor is the temperature at

which the polymerization reaction is to be carried out. For example,a 
tert-butoxy
radical is relatively stable,so an initiator that forms a 
tert-butoxy radical is used for
polymerizations carried out at relatively high temperatures.
PROBLEM 1What monomer would you use to form each of the following polymers?
a.b.c.CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2CF2COOCH3COOCH3COOCH3COOCH3COOCH3CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3OOCH3CH2CCH2CCH2CCH2CCH2CCH2CClClClClClCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CH078CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersTable 28.3
Some Radical InitiatorsCOOC
CH3COCH3CH3OHCH3COCH3CH3OHCH3CNCH3CH3NCCH
32 CH3CCH3CNCNCNN2OCCH3CH3CH3CH3COCH3CH32 CH3CO2CH3CH3KOSOOOCOOOO2 KOSOOOOSOKOOAny compound that readily undergoes homolytic cleavage to form radicals that are
sufficiently energetic to convert an alkene into a radical can serve as an initiator for

radical polymerization. Several radical initiators are shown in Table28.3.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 078
PROBLEM 2Which polymer would be more apt to contain abnormal head-to-head linkages:poly(vinyl
chloride) or polystyrene?PROBLEM 3Draw a segment of polystyrene that contains abnormal head-to-head and tail-to-tail

linkages.PROBLEM 4Show the mechanism for the formation of a segment of poly(vinyl chloride) containing

three units of vinyl chloride and initiated by hydrogen peroxide.
Branching of the Polymer ChainIf the propagating site abstracts a hydrogen atom from a chain,a branch can grow off
the chain at that point.Abstraction of a hydrogen atom from a carbon near the end of a chain leads to shortbranches,whereas abstraction of a hydrogen atom from a carbon near the middle of a

chain results in long branches. Short branches are more likely to be formed than long

ones because the ends of the chain are more accessible.Branching greatly affects the physical properties of the polymer. Linear unbranched
chains can pack together more closely than branched chains can. Consequently,linear

polyethylene (known as high-density polyethylene) is a relatively hard plastic,used

for the production of such things as artificial hip joints,while branched polyethylene

(low-density polyethylene) is a much more flexible polymer,used for trash bags and

dry-cleaning bags.PROBLEM 5Polyethylene can be used for the production of beach chairs and beach balls. Which of
these items is made from more highly branched polyethylene?PROBLEM 6Draw a short segment of branched polystyrene that shows the linkages at the branch point.
chain with short brancheschain with long branches
Section 28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
079HCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2HCH
2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH2Branched polymers are more flexible.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  3:26 PM  Page 079
080CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersCationic PolymerizationIn cationic polymerization,the initiator is an electrophile that adds to the alkene,caus-
ing it to become a cation. The initiator most often used in cationic polymerization is a

Lewis acid,such as or The advantage of such an initiator is that it does not

have an accompanying nucleophile that could act as a chain terminator,as would be

the case with a proton-donating acid such as HCl. The cation formed in the initiation

step reacts with a second monomer,forming a new cation that reacts in turn with a

third monomer. As each subsequent monomer adds to the chain,the positively charged

propagating site always ends up on the last unit added.
Cationic polymerization can be terminated by loss of a proton or by addition of a
nucleophile that reacts with the propagating site. The chain can also be terminated by

a chain-transfer reaction with the solvent (XY).
chain-initiating stepBF3CCH3CH3CH2F3BCH3CH3CH2Cthe alkene monomerreacts with an electrophileAlCl3.BF3CH2CCH2Cpropagating siteschain-propagating stepsCH3CH3CCH3CH3CH2F3BCH3CH3CH2CF3BCH
2CCH2CCH3CH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH2F3BCH3CH3F3BCH
2CCH2CCH2CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2CnnnnCH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CHCCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2CCH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CNuNunnCH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH2CCH2CF3BCH3CH3CH2CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CXYXYHthree ways to terminate the chainloss of a protonreaction with a nucleophilechain-transfer reaction with the solventBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 080
PROBLEM 7List the following groups of monomers in order of decreasing ability to undergo cationic
polymerization:a.b.c.CH2CHCH2CCH3CH2CHCH3CH2OCHOCCH3CH2OCHCOCH3CH2NO2CHCH2CH3CHCH2OCH3CHSection 28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
081Table 28.4
Examples of Alkenes That Undergo Cationic PolymerizationCH2CHCH2CHCH3CH2CHOCCH3OCH2styrene
propylene
vinyl acetateisobutyleneCCH3CH3The carbocation intermediates formed during cationic polymerization,like any
other carbocations,can undergo rearrangement by either a 1,2-hydride shift or a

1,2-methyl shift if rearrangement leads to a more stable carbocation (Section4.6). For

example,the polymer formed from the cationic polymerization of 3-methyl-1-butene

contains both unrearranged and rearranged units. The unrearranged propagating site is

a secondary carbocation,whereas the rearranged propagating site
Ñobtained by a
1,2-hydride shiftÑis a more stable tertiary carbocation. The extent of rearrangement
depends on the reaction temperature.Monomers that are best able to undergo polymerization by a cationic mechanism are
those with substituents that can stabilize the positive charge at the propagating site by

donating electrons inductively or by resonance. Examples of monomers that undergo

cationic polymerization are given in Table28.4.
unrearranged propagating siterearranged 
propagating siteCH3CH2CH2CH2CCH
2CHCH
2CHCH2CH2CCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CHCH3CHCH3CH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH3CHCH3CH2CH2CCHCHCH33-methyl-1-buteneBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 081
082CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersTable 28.5
Examples of Alkenes That Undergo Anionic PolymerizationCH2CHCH2CHClCH2CCH3COCH3OCH2styrene
vinyl chloridemethyl methacrylateacrylonitrileCHCNAnionic PolymerizationIn anionic polymerization,the initiator is a nucleophile that reacts with the alkene to
form a propagating site that is an anion. Nucleophilic attack on an alkene does not

occur readily because alkenes are themselves electron rich. Therefore,the initiator

must be a very good nucleophile,such as sodium amide or butyllithium,and the

alkene must contain an electron-withdrawing substituent to decrease its electron den-

sity. Some alkenes that undergo polymerization by an anionic mechanism are shown in

Table28.5.
The chain can be terminated by a chain transfer reaction with the solvent or by
reaction with an impurity in the reaction mixture. If the solvent cannot donate a proton

to terminate the chain and if all impurities that can react with a carbanion are rigor-

ously excluded,chain propagation will continue until all the monomer has been con-

sumed. At this point,the propagating site will still be active,so the polymerization

reaction will continue if more monomer is added to the system. Such nonterminated
chains are called living polymers
because the chains remain active until they are
Òkilled.ÓLiving polymers usually result from anionic polymerization because the
chains cannot be terminated by proton loss from the polymer,as they can in cationic

polymerization,or by disproportionation or radical recombination,as they can in

radical polymerization.Super glue is a polymer of methyl Becausethe monomer has
two electron-withdrawing groups,it requires only a moderately good nucleophile to

initiate anionic polymerization. An OH group of cellulose or a nucleophilic group of

a protein can act as an initiator. You may well have experienced this reaction if you

have ever spilled a drop of Super glue on your fingers. A nucleophilic group of the
a-cyanoacrylate.CH2CHchain-initiating stepBuLi
CH2CHCNBuCNthe alkene monomerreacts with a nucleophilechain-propagating stepspropagating sitesCH2CHCNBuCH
2CHCNCNBuCH
2CHCNCH2CHCH2CHCNBuCH
2CHCNCH2CHCNCNBuCH
2CHCNCH2CHCNCH2CHBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 082
protein on the surface of the skin initiates the polymerization reaction,with the
result that two fingers can become firmly glued together. The ability to form cova-

lent bonds with groups on the surfaces of the objects to be glued together is what

gives Super glue its amazing strength. Polymers similar to Super glue (they are

butyl,isobutyl,or octyl esters rather than methyl esters) are used by surgeons to

close wounds.
PROBLEM 8List the following groups of monomers in order of decreasing ability to undergo anionic
polymerization:a.b.What Determines the Mechanism?We have seen that the substituent on the alkene determines the best mechanism for
chain-growth polymerization. Alkenes with substituents that can stabilize radicals

readily undergo radical polymerization,alkenes with electron-donating substituents

that can stabilize cations undergo cationic polymerization,and alkenes with electron-

withdrawing substituents that can stabilize anions undergo anionic polymerizations.
Some alkenes undergo polymerization by more than one mechanism. For example,
styrene can undergo polymerization by radical,cationic,and anionic mechanisms be-

cause the phenyl group can stabilize benzylic radicals,benzylic cations,and benzylic

anions. The particular mechanism followed for the polymerization of styrene depends

on the nature of the initiator chosen to start the reaction.Ring-Opening PolymerizationsAlthough ethylene and substituted ethylenes are the monomers most commonly
used for chain-growth polymerization reactions,other compounds can polymerize

as well. For example,epoxides undergo chain-growth polymerization reactions. 

If the initiator is a nucleophile such as or polymerization occurs by an

anionic mechanism.ROROCH
2CHOCH3Opropylene oxideROROCH
2CHOCH2CHOCH2CHOCH3CH3OCH3CH3CH3RO,HOCH2CHCH3CH2CHClCH2CHCNCH2NO2CHCH2CH3CHCH2OCH3CHmethyl-cyanoacrylateSuper glueCNCOCH2OCH3CCNCNCNCNCNCNCH2CCOCH3OCOCH3OCOCH3OCOCH3OCOCH3OCOCH3OCH2CCH2CCH2CCH2CCH2CnSection 28.2Chain-Growth Polymers
0833-D Molecules:Methyl -cyanoacrylate;
Poly(methyl -cyanoacrylate)aaBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 083
If the initiator is a Lewis acid or a proton-donating acid,epoxides are polymerized by
a cationic mechanism. Polymerization reactions that involve ring-opening reactions,such

as the polymerization of propylene oxide,are called 
ring-opening polymerizations.PROBLEM 9Explain why when propylene oxide undergoes anionic polymerization,nucleophilic attack
occurs at the less substituted carbon of the epoxide,but when it undergoes cationic po-

lymerization,nucleophilic attack occurs at the more substituted carbon.
PROBLEM 10Describe the polymerization of 2,2-dimethyloxiranea.by an anionic mechanism

b.by a cationic mechanism
PROBLEM 11Which monomer and which type initiator would you use to synthesize each of the follow-
ing polymers?a.c.
b.d.
PROBLEM 12Draw a short segment of the polymer formed from cationic polymerization of 3,3-
dimethyloxacyclobutane.
3,3-dimethyloxacyclobutaneCH3CH3OCOCH3COCH3OOCH2CHCH2CHNNCH2CHCH2CHCH2CH2OCH2CH2OCH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2CCH2CCH2CHOCH3HOCH3HOHOCH2CHCH3OOCH3CH3HOCH2CHOCH2CHCH3CH3OCH3HOCH2CHCH3OCH3OCH3CH3084CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 084
Section 28.3Stereochemistry of Polymerization ¥ ZieglerÐNatta Catalysts
085Karl Ziegler (1898Ð1973),the son of
a minister,was born in Germany. He

was a professor at the University of

Frankfurt and then at the University

of Heidelberg.
Karl Zieglerand Giulio Nattadidnot work together,but each

independently developed the catalyst

system used in polymerization. They

shared the 1963 Nobel Prize in

chemistry.
28.3Stereochemistry of Polymerization 
¥ZieglerÐNatta CatalystsPolymers formed from monosubstituted ethylenes can exist in three configurations:
isotactic,syndiotactic,and atactic. An 
isotactic polymerhas all of its substituents onthe same side of the fully extended carbon chain. (
Isoand taxisare Greek for ÒthesameÓand Òorder,
Órespectively.) In a 
syndiotactic polymer(syndiomeans Òalternat-ingÓ),the substituents regularly alternate on both sides of the carbon chain. The sub-
stituents in an atactic polymerare randomly oriented.The configuration of the polymer affects its physical properties. Polymers in the
isotactic or syndiotactic configuration are more likely to be crystalline solids because

positioning the substituents in a regular order allows for a more regular packing

arrangement. Polymers in the atactic configuration are more disordered and cannot

pack together as well,so these polymers are less rigid and,therefore,softer.
The configuration of the polymer depends on the mechanism by which polymer-
ization occurs. In general,radical polymerization leads primarily to branched poly-

mers in the atactic configuration. Cationic polymerization produces polymers with a

considerable fraction of the chains in the isotactic or syndiotactic configuration. An-

ionic polymerization produces polymers with the most stereoregularity. The per-

centage of chains in the isotactic or syndiotactic configuration increases as the

polymerization temperature decreases.In 1953,Karl Ziegler and Giulio Natta found that the structure of a polymer could
be controlled if the growing end of the chain and the incoming monomer were coordi-

nated with an aluminumÐtitanium initiator. These initiators are now called
ZieglerÐNatta catalysts. Long,unbranched polymers with either the isotactic or the
syndiotactic configuration can be prepared using Ziegler
ÐNatta catalysts. Whether the
chain is isotactic or syndiotactic depends on the particular Ziegler
ÐNatta catalyst used.
These catalysts revolutionized the field of polymer chemistry because they allow the

synthesis of stronger and stiffer polymers that have greater resistance to cracking and

heat. High-density polyethylene is prepared using a Ziegler
ÐNatta process.The mechanism of the Ziegler
ÐNatta-catalyzed polymerization of a substituted eth-ylene is shown in Figure28.1. The monomer forms a complex (Section6.5) with

titanium at an open coordination site (i.e.,a site available to accept electrons) and the

coordinated alkene is inserted between the titanium and the growing polymer,thereby

extending the polymer chain. Because a new coordination site opens up during inser-

tion of the monomer,the process can be repeated over and over.
Polyacetylene is another polymer prepared by a Ziegler
ÐNatta process. It is aconducting polymerbecause the conjugated double bonds in polyacetylene make it
possible to conduct electricity down its backbone after several electrons are removed

from or added to the backbone.HCCH
polyacetyleneacetyleneCHCH
CHCH
CHCH
na ZieglerÐNatta catalystpCH3HHH3CCH
3HHH3CCH
3HHH3Csyndiotactic configuration (both sides)isotactic configuration (same side)HHHHHH
CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3Giulio Natta (1903Ð1979)was theson of an Italian judge. He was a

professor at the Polytechnic Institute

in Milan,where he became the

director of the Industrial Chemistry

Research Center.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 085
086CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersTiTiTiCH2ZCHCHCH2RZCHCH2CHCH2CHCH2RZZCHCH2CHCH2RZZCHCH2CHCH2RZZZRTiCH2ZCHTiRTiCHCH2RZCH2CHZTia vacantcoordination sitea vacant
coordination sitea vacantcoordination sitea vacant
coordination site28.4Polymerization of Dienes ¥The Manufacture of Rubber
When the bark of a rubber tree is cut,a sticky white liquid oozes out. This is the same
liquid found inside the stalks of dandelions and milkweed. The sticky material is 
latex
,a suspension of rubber particles in water. Latex protects the tree after an injury,by

covering the wound like a bandage.
Natural rubber is a polymer of 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene (isoprene; Section 26.6). On
average,a molecule of rubber contains 5000 isoprene units. All the double bonds in

natural rubber are cis. Rubber is a waterproof material because it consists of a tangle

of hydrocarbon chains that have no affinity for water. Charles Macintosh,a Scotsman,

was the first to use rubber as a waterproof coating for raincoats.
Gutta-percha (from the Malaysian words 
getah
,meaning 
Ògum,Óand percha
,mean-
ing ÒtreeÓ) is a naturally occurring isomer of rubber in which all the double bonds are
trans. Like rubber,gutta-percha is exuded by certain trees,but it is much less common.

It is also harder and more brittle than rubber. Gutta-percha is the filling material that

dentists use in root canals and the material used for the casing of golf balls.PROBLEM 13Draw a short segment of gutta-percha.
By mimicking nature,scientists have learned to make synthetic rubbers with properties
tailored to meet human needs. These materials have some of the properties of natural

rubber,including being waterproof and elastic,but they have some improved properties as

wellÑthey are tougher,more flexible,and more durable than natural rubber.
Synthetic rubbers have been made by polymerizing dienes other than isoprene.One
synthetic rubber is a polymer of 1,3-butadiene in which all the double bonds are cis.

Polymerization is carried out in the presence of a Ziegler
ÐNatta catalyst so that the
configuration of the double bonds in the polymer can be controlled.
isoprene unitscis-poly(2-methyl-1,3-butadiene)natural rubbern3-D Molecules:Isoprene; Natural rubberLatex being collected from arubber tree.Figure 28.1
The mechanism of the ZieglerÐNatta-catalyzed polymerization of a substituted ethylene.Amonomer forms a complex with an open coordination site of titanium and then is

inserted between the titanium and the growing polymer.
pBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 086
Neoprene is a synthetic rubber made by polymerizing 2-chloro-1,3-butadiene in the
presence of a Ziegler
ÐNatta catalyst that causes all the double bonds in the polymer to
have the trans configuration. Neoprene is used to make wet suits,shoe soles,tires,

hoses,and coated fabrics.
A problem common to both natural and most synthetic rubbers is that the polymersare very soft and sticky. They can be hardened by a process known as 
vulcanization.Charles Goodyear discovered this process while trying to improve the properties of

rubber. He accidentally spilled a mixture of rubber and sulfur on a hot stove. To his

surprise,the mixture became hard but flexible. He called the heating of rubber with

sulfur vulcanization,after Vulcan,the Roman god of fire.
Heating rubber with sulfur causes cross-linking
of separate polymer chainsthrough disulfide bonds (Figure28.2). Instead of the individual chains just being en-

tangled together,the vulcanized chains are covalently bonded together in one giant

molecule. Because the polymer has double bonds,the chains have bends and kinks

that prevent them from forming a tightly packed crystalline polymer. When rubber is

stretched,the chains straighten out along the direction of the pull. Cross-linking pre-

vents the polymer from being torn when it is stretched,and the cross-links provide a

reference framework for the material to return to when the stretching force is removed.
CH2CH2CCHClClCla ZieglerÐNatta catalystneoprene2-chloro-1,3-butadienechloroprenena ZieglerÐNatta catalyst1,3-butadiene monomerscis-poly(1,3-butadiene)a synthetic rubbernFigure 28.2
The rigidity of rubber is increasedby cross-linking the polymer chains
with disulfide bonds. When rubber
is stretched, the randomly coiled
chains straighten out and orient
themselves along the direction of
the stretch.Section 28.4Polymerization of Dienes 
¥ The Manufacture of Rubber087SSstretchrelaxa disulfide bondSSSSS
SS
SSS
SSSSCharles Goodyear (1800Ð1860)
,the son of an inventor of farm

implements,was born in Connecticut.

He patented the process of

vulcanization in 1844. The process

was so simple,however,that it could

be easily copied,so he spent many

years contesting infringements on his

patent. In 1852,with Daniel Webster

as his lawyer,he obtained the right to

the patent.The physical properties of rubber can be controlled by regulating the amount of
sulfur used in the vulcanization process. Rubber made with 1Ð3% sulfur is soft andstretchy and is used to make rubber bands. Rubber made with 3
Ð10% sulfur is morerigid and is used in the manufacture of tires. Goodyear
Õs name can be found on many
tires sold today. The story of rubber is an example of a scientist taking a natural

material and finding ways to improve its useful properties.
PROBLEM 14The polymer formed from a diene such as 1,3-butadiene contains vinyl branches. Propose
an anionic polymerization mechanism to account for the formation of these branches.CH2CH2CH2CHCHCH2CH2CHCHCH2CHCH2CH2CHCHCHThe greater the degree of cross-linking,
the more rigid is the polymer.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 087
088CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersTable 28.6Some Examples of Copolymers and Their Uses
MonomerCopolymer nameUses
Saranfilm for wrapping food
SANdishwasher-safe objects,
vaccum cleaner parts
ABSbumpers crash helmets,
telephones,luggage
butyl rubberinner tubes,balls,
inflatable sporting goodsCH2CCH3CH3CH3isobutyleneCH2CH2CHCisopreneCH2CHstyreneCH2CHCNacrylonitrileCH2CHCHCH
21,3-butadieneCH2CHstyreneCH2CHCNacrylonitrileCH2CHClvinyl chlorideCH2CClClvinylidene chloride28.5CopolymersThe polymers we have discussed so far are formed from only one type of monomer and
are called homopolymers. Often,two or more different monomers are used to form a
polymer. The resulting product is called a 
copolymer. Increasing the number of different
monomers used to form the copolymer dramatically increases the number of different

copolymers that can be formed. Even if only two kinds of monomers are used,copoly-

mers with very different properties can be prepared by varying the amounts of each

monomer. Both chain-growth polymers and step-growth polymers can be copolymers.

Many of the synthetic polymers used today are copolymers. Table28.6shows some com-

mon copolymers and the monomers from which they are synthesized.
There are four types of copolymers. In an 
alternating copolymer
,the two
monomers alternate. In a block copolymer,there are blocks of each kind of monomer.
In a random copolymer,the distribution of monomers is random. A 
graft copolymercontains branches derived from one monomer grafted onto a backbone derived from

another monomer. These structural differences extend the range of physical properties

available to the scientist designing the copolymer.
an alternating copolymerABABABABABABABABABABABAa block copolymerAAAAABBBBBAAAAABBBBBAAAa random copolymerAABABABBABAABBABABBAAABa graft copolymerAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABB
B
B
B
BBB
B
B
B
BBB
B
B
B
BBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 088
Section 28.6Step-Growth Polymers
0890% reaction50% reaction75% reaction
Figure 28.3
Progress of a step-growthpolymerization.Step-growth polymers are made by
combining molecules with reactive

groups at each end.
28.6Step-Growth Polymers
Step-growth polymers
are formed by the intermolecular reaction of bifunctional mole-
cules (molecules with two functional groups). When the functional groups react,in

most cases a small molecule such as alcohol,or HCl is lost. This is why these

polymers are also called condensation polymers.
There are two types of step-growth polymers. One type is formed by the reaction
of a single monomer that possesses two different functional groups A and B. Func-

tional group A of one monomer reacts with functional group B of another

monomer.
The other type of step-growth polymer is formed by the reaction of two different bi-
functional monomers. One monomer contains two A functional groups and the other

monomer contains two B functional groups.
The formation of step-growth polymers,unlike the formation of chain-growth
polymers,does not involve chain reactions. Any two monomers (or short chains)

can react. The progress of a typical step-growth polymerization is shown schemati-

cally in Figure28.3. When the reaction is 50% complete (12 bonds have formed

between 25 monomers),the reaction products are primarily dimers and trimers.

Even at 75% completion,no long chains have been formed. This means that if step-

growth polymerization is to lead to long-chain polymers,very high yields must

beachieved.
XBABABAXBABABAH2O,PolyamidesNylon is the common name of a synthetic polyamide. Nylon 6 is an example of a step-
growth polymer formed by a monomer with two different functional groups. The car-

boxylic acid group of one monomer reacts with the amino group of another monomer,

resulting in the formation of amide groups. Structurally,the reaction is similar to the

polymerization of acids to form proteins (Section23.7). This particular nylon

is called nylon 6 because it is formed from the polymerization of 6-aminohexanoic

acid,a compound that contains six carbons.
OOH3N(CH2)5CONH(CH2)5CONH(CH2)5CONH(CH2)5CH2Onylon 6a polyamiden6-aminohexanoic acida-aminoNylon was first synthesized in 1931
by Wallace Carothers (1896Ð1937)
.He was born in Iowa and received a

Ph.D. from the University of Illinois.

He taught there and at Harvard be-

fore being hired by DuPont to head

its program in basic science. Nylon

was introduced to the public in 1939,

but its widespread use was delayed

until after World War II because all

nylon produced during the war was

used by the military. Carothers died

unaware of the era of synthetic fibers

that dawned after the war.
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 089
090CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersThe starting material for nylon 6 is The lactam is opened by hydrolysis.
Nylon 66is an example of a step-growth polymer formed by two different bifunction-
al monomers:adipic acid and 1,6-hexanediamine. It is called nylon 66 because it is a

polyamide formed from a six-carbon diacid and a six-carbon diamine.Nylon first found wide use in textiles and carpets. Because it is resistant to stress,it
is now used in many other applications,such as mountaineering ropes,tire cords and

fishing lines,and as a substitute for metal in bearings and gears. The extended appli-

cations of nylon precipitated a search for new 
Òsuper fibers
Ówith super strength andsuper heat resistance.PROBLEM 15a.Draw a short segment of nylon 4.
b.From what lactam is nylon 4 synthesized?

c.Draw a short segment of nylon 44.
PROBLEM 16Write an equation that explains what will happen if a scientist working in the laboratory
spills sulfuric acid on her nylon 66 hose.
One super fiber is Kevlar
¨,a polymer of 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid and 
1,4-diaminobenzene. The incorporation of aromatic rings into polymers has been

found to result in polymers with great physical strength. Aromatic polyamides are

called aramides. Kevlar
¨is an aramide with a tensile strength greater than that ofsteel. Army helmets are made of Kevlar
¨,which is also used for lightweight bullet-
proof vests and high-performance skis. Because it is stable at very high tempera-

tures,it is used in the protective clothing worn by firefighters.
Kevlar
¨owes its strength to the way in which the individual polymer chains interact
with each other. The chains are hydrogen bonded,causing them to form a sheetlike

structure.ONHOH3NCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2COH-caprolactam-aminocaproic acid6-aminohexanoic acidH, H2Oe-caprolactam.3-D Molecules:-Caprolactam;Nylon 6; 
Nylon 66enOOHOC(CH2)4COHOOC(CH2)4COONH(CH2)6NHC(CH2)4CNH(CH
2)6NHH2OH2N(CH2)6NH2nylon 66adipic acid1,6-hexanediamine
OCOCHOOH
1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid1,4-diaminobenzene
OCOCNH
NHOCOCNH
NHH2NNH2Kevlaran aramidenH2ONylon is pulled from a beaker ofadipoyl chloride and
1,6-hexanediamine.BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 090
Section 28.6Step-Growth Polymers
091PolyestersPolyesters
are step-growth polymers in which the monomer units are joined together
by ester groups. They have found wide commercial use as fibers,plastics,and

coatings. The most common polyester is known by the trade name Dacron
¨and ismade by the transesterification (Section17.10) of dimethyl terephthalate with ethylene

glycol. High resilience,durability,and moisture resistance are the properties of this

polymer that contribute to its 
Òwash-and-wear
Ócharacteristics.Kodel
¨polyester is formed by the transesterification of dimethyl terephthalate with
1,4-di(hydroxymethyl)cyclohexane. The stiff polyester chain causes the fiber to have a

harsh feel that can be softened by blending it with wool or cotton.
PROBLEM 17What happens to polyester slacks if aqueous NaOH is spilled on them?Polyesters with two ester groups bonded to the same carbon are known as
polycarbonates. Lexan
¨is produced by the reaction of phosgene with bisphenol A.
Lexan
¨is a strong,transparent polymer used for bulletproof windows and traffic-light
lenses. In recent years,polycarbonates have become important polymers in the

automobile industry as well as in the manufacture of compact discs.
COOCOCCONHHNCOOCOCCONHHNCOOCOCCONHHNOCOCCH3OOCH
3dimethyl terephthalate1,4-di(hydroxymethyl)cyclohexane
OCOCOCH
2CH2OOCOCOCH
2CH2HOCH2CH2OHKodelnCH3OHOCOCCH3OOCH
3OCOCOCH2CH2OOCH
2CH2Opoly(ethylene terephthalate)Dacrona polyesterHOCH2CH2OHCH3OHndimethyl terephthalate1,2-ethanediol
ethylene glycolBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 091
092CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersEpoxy ResinsEpoxy resins
arethe strongest adhesives known. They can adhere to almost any kind
of surface and are resistant to solvents and to extremes of temperature. When an epoxy

cement is used,a low-molecular-weight 
prepolymer
(the most common is a polymerof bisphenol A and epichlorohydrin) is mixed with a 
hardener
Ña compound that willreact with the prepolymer to form a cross-linked polymer.
PROBLEM 18a.Propose a mechanism for the formation of the prepolymer formed by bisphenol A and
epichlorohydrin.b.Propose a mechanism for the reaction of the prepolymer with the hardener.
Tutorial:
Repeating units in 
step-growth polymersOCOOCCH3CH3CClClHO
bisphenol ALexana polycarbonatephosgeneOHCH3CH3CH3COOCOCH3COCH3OCCH3COHClnnnnOHOCOH
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2ClCH3OHOOOCOCH
2CHCH2CH3CH3CH2CH2NHCH2CH2CH2CH2NH
CH2CH2OCOCH
2CH3CH3bisphenol Aepichlorohydrin
prepolymer an epoxy resinNHCH2CHCH2OHOHOCOCH
2CHCH2OHCH3CH3OCOCH
2CHCH2NHCH3CH3NHCH2CHCH2OHOHOCOCH
2CHCH2OHCH3CH3OCOCH
2CHCH2NHCH3CH3H2NCH2CH2NHCH2CH2NH2hardenerHClBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 092
Section 28.7Physical Properties of Polymers
093Polyurethanes
A urethane
Ñalso called a carbamateÑis a compound that has an OR group and 
an NHR group bonded to the same carbonyl carbon. Urethanes can be prepared by

treating an isocyanate with an alcohol.
Polyurethanes
are polymers that contain urethane groups.One of the most common
polyurethanes is prepared by the polymerization of toluene-2,6-diisocyanate and

ethylene glycol. If the reaction is carried out in the presence of a blowing agent,the prod-

uct is a polyurethane foam. Blowing agents are gases such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide.

At one time,chlorofluorocarbons
Ñlow-boiling liquids that vaporize on heating
Ñwereused,but they have been banned for environmental reasons (Section9.9). Polyurethane

foams are used for furniture stuffing,carpet backings,and insulation. Notice that

polyurethanes prepared from diisocyanates and diols are the only step-growth polymers

that we have seen in which a small molecule is 
notlost during polymerization.One of the most important uses of polyurethanes is in fabrics with elastic properties,
such as spandex (Lycra
¨). These materials are block copolymers in which some of the
polymer segments are polyurethanes,some are polyesters,and some are polyamides. The

blocks of polyurethane are soft,amorphous segments that become crystalline on

stretching (Section28.7). When the tension is released,they revert to the amorphous state.
PROBLEM 19If a small amount of glycerol is added to the reaction mixture of toluene-2,6-diisocyanate
and ethylene glycol during the synthesis of polyurethane foam,a much stiffer foam is

obtained. Explain.28.7Physical Properties of Polymers
The individual chains of a polymer such as polyethylene are held together by van der
Waals forces. Because these forces operate only at small distances,they are strongest if

the polymer chains can line up in an ordered,closely packed array. The regions of the

polymer in which the chains are highly ordered with respect to one another are called
crystallites(Figure28.4). Between the crystallites are amorphous,noncrystalline
regions in which the chains are randomly oriented. The more crystalline
Ñthe moreOHOHOHCHCH2CH2glycerolORNROHRNH
COCOR
an isocyanatean alcohola urethane
3-D Molecules:Toluene-2,6-diisocyanate;

Ethylene glycolnOCCNOCONCH3toluene-2,6-diisocyanateethylene glycolNHOCOCH2CH2ONHCH3OCNHOCOCH2CH2ONHCH3a polyurethaneOCHOCH2CH2OHFigure 28.4
In the circled regions, calledcrystallites, the polymer chains are
highly ordered, similar to the
ordering found in crystals. 
Between the circles are
noncrystalline regions in which the
polymer chains are randomly
oriented.BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 093
094CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersTable 28.7Properties of Polyethylene as a Function of Crystallinity
Crystallinity (%)5562707785
Density 0.920.930.940.950.96

Melting point (¡C)109116125130133
(gcm3)Thermoplastic PolymersPlastics can be classified according to the physical properties imparted to them by the
way in which their individual chains are arranged. 
Thermoplastic polymershave
both ordered crystalline regions and amorphous noncrystalline regions. Thermoplastic

polymers are hard at room temperature,but soft enough to be molded when heated,be-

cause the individual chains can slip past one another at elevated temperatures. Ther-

moplastic polymers are the plastics we encounter most often in our daily lives
Ñincombs,toys,switch plates,and telephone casings,for example. They are the plastics

that are easily cracked.
Thermosetting PolymersVery strong and rigid materials can be obtained if polymer chains are cross-linked. The

greater the degree of cross-linking,the more rigid is the polymer. Such cross-linked

polymers are called thermosetting polymers. After they are hardened,they cannot be
remelted by heating,because the cross-links are covalent bonds,not intermolecular van

der Waals forces. Cross-linking reduces the mobility of the polymer chains,causing the

polymer to be relatively brittle. Because thermosetting polymers do not have the wide

range of properties characteristic of thermoplastic polymers,they are less widely used.
Melmac¨,a highly cross-linked thermosetting polymer of melamine and formaldehyde,
is a hard,moisture-resistant material. Because it is colorless,Melmac
¨can be made intomaterials with pastel colors. It is used to make lightweight dishes and counter surfaces.
PROBLEM 20Propose a mechanism for the formation of Melmac¨.PROBLEM 21Bakelite was the first of the thermosetting polymers. It is a highly cross-linked polymer
formed from the acid-catalyzed polymerization of phenol and formaldehyde. It is a much
darker polymer than Melmac
¨,so the range of colors of products made from Bakelite is
limited. Propose a structure for Bakelite.
Leo Hendrik Baekeland

(1863Ð1944)discovered Bakelite
while looking for a substitute for
shellac in his home laboratory. He

was born in Belgium and became a
professor of chemistry at the

University of Ghent. A fellowship

brought him to the United States in

1889,and he decided to stay. His

hobby was photography,and he

invented photographic paper that

could be developed under artificial

light. He sold the patent to 
Eastman-Kodak.
H2NNH
2NHNH
NH2H2COformaldehydeMelmacmelamineNNNNHCH2NHNHCH2NHCH2NHNNNNHNHNNNNHCH2NHNNNNHNNNH2OorderedÑthe polymer is,the denser,harder,and more resistant to heat it is (Table28.7).
If the polymer chains possess substituents (as does poly[methyl methacrylate],for ex-

ample) or have branches that prevent them from packing closely together,the density of

the polymer is reduced.BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 094
polymer used to make dental impressionsnONNOOOOOOODESIGNING A POLYMER
A polymer used for making dental impressionsmust be soft enough initially to be molded aroundthe teeth,but must become hard enough later to maintain a fixed

shape. The polymer commonly used for dental impressions

contains three-membered aziridine rings that react to cross-linkSection 28.7Physical Properties of Polymers
095the chains. Because aziridine rings are not very reactive,cross-
linking occurs relatively slowly,so most of the hardening of the

polymer does not occur until the polymer is removed from the

patientÕs mouth.conventional polymeroriented polymer
Figure 28.5
The creation of an orientedpolymer.
ElastomersAn elastomeris a polymer that stretches and then reverts to its original shape. It is a
randomly oriented amorphous polymer,but it must have some cross-linking so that the

chains do not slip over one another. When elastomers are stretched,the random chains

stretch out. The van der Waals forces are not strong enough to maintain them in that

arrangement; therefore,when the stretching force is removed,the chains go back to

their random shapes. Rubber is an example of an elastomer.
Oriented PolymersPolymers that are stronger than steel or that conduct electricity almost as well as cop-
per can be made by taking the polymer chains obtained by conventional polymeriza-

tion,stretching them out,and putting them back together in a parallel fashion

(Figure28.5). Such polymers are called 
oriented polymers. Converting conventional
polymers into oriented polymers has been compared to ÒuncookingÓspaghetti. Theconventional polymer is disordered cooked spaghetti,whereas the oriented polymer is

ordered raw spaghetti.
A polymer used for making contact lenses must be suffi-
ciently hydrophilic to allow lubrication of the eye. Such a poly-

mer,therefore,has many OH groups.
CCH3polymer used to make contact lensesCH2CH2CHCH
2CHCH
2CHCH
OCCH2OCCH3OCCH2CH2OHCH
2OHODyneema¨,the strongest commercially available fabric,is an oriented polyethyl-
ene polymer. Its molecular weight is 100 times greater than that of high-density

polyethylene. It is lighter than Kevlar
¨and at least 40% stronger. A rope made of
Dyneema¨can lift almost 119,000 pounds,whereas a steel rope of similar size fails
before the weight reaches 13,000 pounds! It is astounding that a chain of carbon
atoms can be stretched and properly oriented to produce a material stronger than

steel. Dyneema is used to make full-face crash helmets,protective fencing suits,and

hang gliders.BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 095
096CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersPlasticizersA plasticizer can be added to a polymer to make it more flexible.A 
plasticizeris anorganic compound that dissolves in the polymer,lowering the attractions between the

polymer chains,which allows them to slide past one another. Dibutyl phthalate is a com-

monly used plasticizer. It is added to poly(vinyl chloride)
Ñnormally a brittle polymerÑto make products such as vinyl raincoats,shower curtains,and garden hoses.
An important criterion to consider in choosing a plasticizer is its permanenceÑhow well the plasticizer remains in the polymer. The 
Ònew-car smell
Óappreciatedby car owners is the odor of the plasticizer that has vaporized from the vinyl

upholstery. When a significant amount of the plasticizer has evaporated,the uphol-

stery becomes brittle and cracks. Phthalates with higher molecular weights and
lower vapor pressures than those of dibutyl phthalate are now commonly used for

car interiors.Biodegradable PolymersBiodegradable polymersare polymers that can be broken into small segments by
enzyme-catalyzed reactions. The enzymes are produced by microorganisms. The

carbonÐcarbon bonds of chain-growth polymers are inert to enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tions,so they are nonbiodegradable unless bonds that 
canbe broken by enzymes are
inserted into the polymer. Then,when the polymer is buried as waste,microorganisms

present in the ground can degrade the polymer. One method used to make a polymer

biodegradable involves inserting hydrolyzable ester groups into it. For example,if the

acetal shown below is added to an alkene undergoing radical polymerization,ester

groups will be inserted into the polymer,forming 
Òweak linksÓthat are susceptible to
enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis.OOCH2CH2CH2CH3COOCH2CH2CH2CH3Cdibutyl phthalatea plasticizer3-D Molecule:Dibutyl phthalateSummaryA polymeris a large molecule made by linking together
repeating units of small molecules called monomers. Theprocess of linking them is called polymerization.Polymer chemistry
is part of the larger discipline of
materials science. Polymers can be divided into two
groups:synthetic polymers,which are synthesized by
an acetalORCH2CHCH
2CH2CH2CCH2CH2OOCH2CHRRCH2CHCH2CH2CH2CRRCH2CHCH2OCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CHCORCH2CHCH2OCH2CH2CH2CH2CCH2CH2OOa Òweak linkÓBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 096
Key Terms
097scientists,and 
biopolymers,which are synthesized by or-
ganisms. Synthetic polymers can be divided into two

classes,depending on their method of preparation:
chain-growth polymers
(also called addition polymers) andstep-growth polymers
(also known as 
condensationpolymers).Chain-growth polymers are made by 
chain reactions
Ñby the addition of monomers to the end of a growing chain.

These reactions take place by one of three mechanisms:

radical polymerization,cationic polymerization,or 
an-ionic polymerization. Each mechanism has an initiationstep that starts the polymerization,propagation steps that

allow the chain to grow at the 
propagating site
,and termi-
nation steps that stop the growth of the chain. The choice of

mechanism depends on the structure of the monomerandthe initiator used to activate the monomer. In radical poly-

merization,the initiator is a radical; in cationic polymeriza-

tion,it is an electrophile; and in cationic polymerization,it

is a nucleophile. Nonterminated polymer chains are called
living polymers
.Chain-growth polymerization exhibits a preference for
head-to-tail addition. Branching affects the physical prop-
erties of the polymer because linear unbranched chains can
pack together more closely than branched chains can. The

substituents are on the same side of the carbon chain in an
isotactic polymer,alternate on both sides of the chain in a
syndiotactic polymer,and are randomly oriented in an
atactic polymer. The structure of a polymer can be con-
trolled with ZieglerÐNatta catalysts. Natural rubber is apolymer of 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene. Synthetic rubbers have

been made by polymerizing dienes other than isoprene.
Heating rubber with sulfur to cross-link the chains is called
vulcanization.Homopolymersare made of one kind of monomer,
whereas copolymersare made of more than one kind. In an
alternating copolymer
,the two monomers alternate. In a
block copolymer,there are blocks of each kind of monomer.
In a random copolymer,the distribution of monomers is
random. A graft copolymercontains branches derived from
one monomer grafted onto a backbone derived from another.
Step-growth polymers
are made by combining two
molecules with reactive functional groups at each end.

There are two types of step-growth polymers. One type is

formed by using a single monomer with two different func-

tional groups,A and B. The other is formed by using two

different bifunctional monomers,one containing two A

functional groups and the other containing two B function-

al groups. The formation of step-growth polymers does not

involve chain reactions.
Nylon is a polyamide. Aromatic polyamides are called
aramides. Dacron¨is a polyester. 
Polycarbonates
arepolyesters with two ester groups bonded to the same car-

bon. A urethane
is a compound that has an ester and an
amide group bonded to the same carbon.Crystallitesare highly ordered regions of a polymer.
The more crystalline the polymer is,the denser,harder,

and more resistant to heat it is. Thermoplastic polymershave crystalline and noncrystalline regions. 
Thermoset-ting polymershave cross-linked polymer chains. The
greater the degree of cross-linking,the more rigid is the

polymer. An 
elastomeris a plastic that stretches and thenreverts to its original shape. A 
plasticizeris an organic
compound that dissolves in the polymer and allows the

chains to slide past one another. 
Biodegradable polymerscan be broken into small segments by enzyme-catalyzed

reactions.Key Terms
addition polymer (p.073)
alternating copolymer (p.088)

anionic polymerization (p.074)

aramide (p.090)

atactic polymer (p.085)

biodegradable polymer (p.096)

biopolymer (p.072)

block copolymer (p.088)

cationic polymerization (p.074)

chain-growth polymer (p.073)

chain reaction (p.073)

chain transfer (p.076)

condensation polymer (p.074)

conducting polymer (p.085)

copolymer (p.088)

cross-linking (p.087)

crystallites (p.093)
elastomer (p.095)
epoxy resin (p.092)

graft copolymer (p.088)

head-to-tail addition (p.077)

homopolymer (p.088)

isotactic polymer (p.085)

living polymer (p.082)

materials science (p.073)

monomer (p.072)

oriented polymer (p.095)

plastic (p.073)

plasticizer (p.096)

polyamide (p.089)

polycarbonate (p.091)

polyester (p.074)

polymer (p.072)

polymer chemistry (p.073)
polymerization (p.072)
polyurethane (p.093)

propagating site (p.074)

radical polymerization (p.074)

random copolymer (p.088)

ring-opening polymerization (p.084)

step-growth polymer (p.074)

syndiotactic polymer (p.085)

synthetic polymer (p.072)

thermoplastic polymer (p.094)

thermosetting polymer (p.094)

urethane (p.093)

vinyl polymer (p.074)

vulcanization (p.087)

Ziegler
ÐNatta catalyst (p.085)
alpha olefins (p.074)
AU:Want to add term to listing? If not, make lightface on p.074
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 097
098CHAPTER 28Synthetic PolymersProblems
22.Draw short segments of the polymers obtained from the following monomers:
a.d.
b.e.
c.For each polymer,indicate whether the polymerization is a chain-growth or a step-growth polymerization.
23.Draw the repeating unit of the step-growth polymer that will be formed from each of the following reactions:
a.b.c.d.24.Draw the structure of the monomer or monomers used to synthesize the following polymers:
a.e.
b.f.
c.g.
d.h.
For each polymer,indicate whether it is a chain-growth polymer or a step-growth polymer.
25.Explain why the configuration of a polymer of isobutylene is not isotactic,syndiotactic,or atactic.
OOCCOCH
2CH2OCH2CHNCH2CCH3SO2SO2NH(CH2)6NHCH2CH2CH2CH2COOCH3CH2CHOCH2CCHCH
2CH3CH2CH3CH2CHOOCHP(C6H5)3CH(C6H5)3POOH2NOCH
2CH2CH2ONH
2HCCHCH3CH3CCH3CH3CCl
ClHOCH2OHBF3ClCH2CH2OCH2CH2ClHNNH
OHO(CH2)5COHCH3OCNNCOHOCH
2CH2OHCH2CHCO2HOOClC(CH2)5CClH
2N(CH2)5NH2CH2CHFBRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 098
Problems09926.Draw short segments of the polymers obtained from the following compounds under the given reaction conditions:
a.d.
b.e.
c.f.
27.Quiana
¨is a synthetic fabric that feels very much like silk.
a.Is Quiana
¨a nylon or a polyester?
b.What monomers are used to synthesize Quiana
¨?28.Explain why a random copolymer is obtained when 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene undergoes cationic polymerization.
29.Polly Propylene has started two polymerization reactions. One flask contains a monomer that polymerizes by a chain-growth
mechanism,and the other flask contains a monomer that polymerizes by a step-growth mechanism. When the reactions are

terminated and the contents of the flasks analyzed,one flask contains a high-molecular-weight polymer and some monomer,but

very little material of intermediate molecular weight. The other flask contains mainly material of intermediate molecular weigh
tand very little monomer or high-molecular-weight material. Which flask contains which product? Explain.
30.Poly(vinyl alcohol) is a polymer used to make fibers and adhesives. It is synthesized by hydrolysis or alcoholysis of the po
lymerobtained from polymerization of vinyl acetate.

a.Why is poly(vinyl alcohol) not prepared by polymerizing vinyl alcohol?

b.Is poly(vinyl acetate) a polyester?
31.Five different repeating units are found in the polymer obtained by cationic polymerization of 4-methyl-1-pentene. Identify 
theserepeating units.32.If a peroxide is added to styrene,the polymer known as polystyrene is formed. If a small amount of 1,4-divinylbenzene is add
ed tothe reaction mixture,a stronger and more rigid polymer is formed. Draw a short section of this more rigid polymer.
33.A particularly strong and rigid polyester used for electronic parts is marketed under the trade name Glyptal
¨. It is a polymer ofterephthalic acid and glycerol. Draw a segment of the polymer,and explain why it is so strong.
1,4-divinylbenzeneCHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2OCCH3OOCCH3OOCCH3CHCH2CHCH2CHCH2OHOHOH
OH2Opoly(vinyl alcohol)poly(vinyl acetate)CCHCH3CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CCH3CH3CH3CHCH2CCH3CH3CH3CHCH2CH3CCH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3OQuianaNHCH2C(CH
2)6OCNH
NHCH2NHCHCH2CH2CH3CH2BF3NCH3CCH2CH3peroxidea ZieglerÐNatta catalystCCCH2CH2CH3CH3CH2CHClCH3CH2CH2CH2LiONHH, H2OH2COCHCH3CH3OAU:OK as changed?
AU:OK as changed?
BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  2:47 PM  Page 099
100CHAPTER 28Synthetic Polymers34.Draw a short section of the polymer obtained from anionic polymerization of 
35.Which monomer would give a greater yield of polymer,5-hydroxypentanoic acid or 6-hydroxyhexanoic acid? Explain your choice.
36.When rubber balls and other objects made of natural rubber are exposed to the air for long periods,they turn brittle and cra
ck. Thisdoes not happen to objects made of polyethylene. Explain.37.Why do vinyl raincoats become brittle as they get old,even if they are not exposed to air or to any pollutants?
38.The polymer shown here is synthesized by hydroxide ionÐpromoted hydrolysis of an alternating copolymer of 
para
-nitrophenyl
methacrylate and acrylate.
a.Propose a mechanism for the formation of the alternating copolymer.

b.Explain why hydrolysis of the copolymer to form the polymer occurs much more rapidly than hydrolysis of 
para
-nitrophenyl
acetate.39.An alternating copolymer of styrene and vinyl acetate can be turned into a graft copolymer by hydrolyzing it and then adding
ethylene oxide. Draw the structure of the graft copolymer.
40.How could head-to-head poly(vinyl bromide) be synthesized?
41.Delrin
¨(polyoxymethylene) is a tough self-lubricating polymer used in gear wheels. It is made by polymerizing formaldehyde inthe presence of an acid catalyst.
a.Propose a mechanism for formation of a segment of the polymer.

b.Is Delrin
¨a chain-growth polymer or a step-growth polymer?
head-to-head poly(vinyl bromide)CH2CHCHCH2CH2CHCHCH2BrBr
BrBr
para-nitrophenyl acetateOONO2CH3Calternating copolymerpolymerpara-nitrophenylmethacrylateCH3COCOCO2CH2CHCH2CH3CO2CCH2CHCH2CO2NO2NO2HOH2OCH3CCCH2CHCH2CO2OOacrylate3,3-dimethyloxacyclobutaneCH3CH3Ob-propiolactone.BRUI28-71_100r2  27-02-2003  3:22 PM  Page 0100
29Pericyclic Reactions101Vitamin DReactionsof organic
compounds can be divided

into three classesÑpolar reactions,radical reactions,and pericyclic reactions. The

most common and the ones most familiar to you are

polar reactions. A 
polar reaction
is one in which anucleophile reacts with an electrophile. Both electrons in
the new bond come from the nucleophile.
A radical reaction
is one in which a new bond is formed using one electron from each
of the reactants.A pericyclic reaction
occurs as a result of reorganizing the electrons in the reactant(s).
In this chapter we will look at the three most common types of pericyclic reactionsÑ

electrocyclic reactions,cycloaddition reactions,and sigmatropic rearrangements.
29.1Three Kinds of Pericyclic Reactions
An electrocyclic reaction
is an intramolecular reaction in which a new (sigma)
bond is formed between the ends of a conjugated (pi) system. This reaction is easy

to recognizeÑthe product is a cycliccompound that has one more ring and one fewer
bond than the reactant.ppsa radical reactionCH3CH2CH3CH2ClClClCl
HOCH3OHBra polar reactionCH3BrBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 101
102CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsElectrocyclic reactions are reversible. In the reverse direction,an electrocyclic
reaction is one in which a bond in a cyclic reactant breaks,forming a conjugated 

system that has one more
bond than the cyclic reactant.
In acycloaddition reaction
,two different bond
Ðcontaining molecules react toform a cyclic compound. Each of the reactants loses a bond,and the resulting cyclic

product has two new bonds. The Diels
ÐAlder reaction is a familiar example of a
cycloaddition reaction (Section8.8).
In a sigmatropic rearrangement
,a bond is broken in the reactant,a new 
bond is formed in the product,and the bonds rearrange. The number of bonds

does not change (the reactant and the product have the same number of bonds).

The bond that is broken can be in the middle of the system or at the end of the
system. The system consists of the double-bonded carbons and the carbons
immediately adjacent to them.H3C   bond is broken
in the middle of
the    system sigmatropic rearrangementsH3C    bond
is formedproduct and reactant have the same number of    bondspppspppssnew    bondnew    bond1,3-butadienecyclohexenethe product has two fewer      bonds than the sum of the
   bonds in the reactantsa cycloaddition reaction
ethenespp   bond
breakscyclobutenethe product has one more   bond than the reactant
1,3-butadieneppsnew    bond1,3,5-hexatriene1,3-cyclohexadiene
the product has one fewer   bond than the reactantan electrocyclic reaction
3-D Molecules:1,3,5-Hexatriene;
1,3-Butadiene;
3-Methyl-1,5-hexadieneBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 102
Section 29.1Three Kinds of Pericyclic Reactions
103Roald Hoffmannand Kenichi
Fukuishared the 1981 Nobel 
Prize in chemistry for the 

conservation of orbital symmetry 
theory and the frontier orbital 

theory. 
R. B. Woodward
did notreceive a share in the prize because

he died two years before it was

awarded,and Alfred NobelÕs will

stipulates that the prize cannot be
awarded posthumously. Woodward,

however,had received the 1965

Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work

in organic synthesis.
Notice that electrocyclic reactions and sigmatropic rearrangements occur within a
single systemÑthey are 
intra
molecular reactions. In contrast,cycloaddition
reactions involve the interaction of two different systems
Ñthey are usually
intermolecular reactions. The three kinds of pericyclic reactions share the following
common features:¥They are all concerted reactions. This means that all the electron reorganization
takes place in a single step. Therefore,there is one transition state and no

intermediate.¥Because the reactions are concerted,they are highly stereoselective.
¥The reactions are generally not affected by catalysts.
We will see that the configuration of the product formed in a pericyclic reaction
depends on¥the configuration of the reactant
¥the number of conjugated double bonds or pairs of electrons in the reacting system¥whether the reaction is a thermal reaction or a photochemical reactionA photochemical reaction
is one that takes place when a reactant absorbs light. A
thermal reaction
takes place 
withoutthe absorption of light. Despite its name,a
thermal reaction does not necessarily require more heat than what is available at room

temperature. Some thermal reactions do require additional heat in order to take place

at a reasonable rate,but others readily occur at,or even below,room temperature.
For many years,pericyclic reactions puzzled chemists. Why did some pericyclic
reactions take place only under thermal conditions,whereas others took place only

under photochemical conditions,and yet others were successfully carried out under

both thermal and photochemical conditions? Another puzzling aspect of pericyclic

reactions was the configurations of the products that were formed. After many

pericyclic reactions had been investigated,it became apparent that if a pericyclic

reaction could take place under both thermal and photochemical conditions,the

configuration of the product formed under one set of conditions was different from

the configuration of the product formed under the other set of conditions. For exam-

ple,if the cis isomer was obtained under thermal conditions,the trans isomer was

obtained under photochemical conditions and vice versa.
It took two very talented chemists,each bringing his own expertise to the problem,
to explain the puzzling behavior of pericyclic reactions. In 1965,R. B. Woodward,an

experimentalist,and Roald Hoffmann,a theorist,developed the 
conservation of
orbital symmetry theoryto explain the relationship among the structure and config-
uration of the reactant,the conditions (thermal and/or photochemical) under which the

reaction takes place,and the configuration of the product. Because the behavior of per-

icyclic reactions is so precise,it is not surprising that everything about their behavior

can be explained by one simple theory. The difficult part was having the insight to ar-

rive at the theory.
The conservation of orbital symmetry theory states that 
in-phase orbitals overlap
during the course of a pericyclic reaction
. The conservation of orbital symmetry
theory was based on the 
frontier orbital theory
put forth by Kenichi Fukui in
1954. Although Fukui
Õs theory was more than 10 years old,it had been overlooked
because of its mathematical complexity and Fukui
Õs failure to apply it to stereose-
lective reactions.
pp   bond is broken
at the end of
the    system H3CHCH2H3CCH2H bond
is formedRobert B. Woodward (1917Ð1979)
was born in Boston and first became

acquainted with chemistry in his

home laboratory. He entered MIT at

the age of 16 and received a Ph.D.

the same year that those who entered

MIT with him received their B.A.Õs.

He went to Harvard as a

postdoctoral fellow and remained

there for his entire career.

Cholesterol,cortisone,strychnine,

reserpine (the first tranquilizing

drug),chlorophyll,tetracycline,and

vitamin are just some of the

complicated organic molecules

Woodward synthesized. He received

the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1965.
B12BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 103
104CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsAccording to the conservation of orbital symmetry theory,whether a compound
will undergo a pericyclic reaction under particular conditions 
andwhat product will beformed both depend on molecular orbital symmetry. To understand pericyclic reac-

tions,therefore,we must now review molecular orbital theory. We will then be able to

understand how the symmetry of a molecular orbital controls both the conditions

under which a pericyclic reaction takes place and the configuration of the product that

is formed.PROBLEM 1Examine the following pericyclic reactions. For each reaction,indicate whether it is an
electrocyclic reaction,a cycloaddition reaction,or a sigmatropic rearrangement.
a.b.c.d.29.2Molecular Orbitals and Orbital SymmetryThe overlap of 
patomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals can be described
mathematically using quantum mechanics. The result of the mathematical treat-

ment can be described simply in nonmathematical terms by 
molecular orbital(MO) theory
. You were introduced to molecular orbital theory in Sections1.6
and 7.11. Take a few minutes to review the following key points raised in these

sections.¥The two lobes of a 
porbital have opposite phases. When two in-phase atomic
orbitals interact,a covalent bond is formed. When two out-of-phase atomic or-

bitals interact,a node is created between the two nuclei.
¥Electrons fill molecular orbitals according to the same rules
Ñthe aufbauprinciple,the Pauli exclusion principle,Hund
Õs ruleÑthat govern how they fill
atomic orbitals:An electron goes into the available molecular orbital with the

lowest energy,and only two electrons can occupy a particular molecular orbital

(Section1.2).
¥Because the portion of a molecule is perpendicular to the frame-
work of the bonds,the bonds can be treated independently. Each carbon

atom that forms a bond has a 
porbital,and the 
porbitals of the carbonatoms combine to produce a molecular orbital. Thus,a molecular orbital

can be described by the 
linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO)
. In amolecular orbital,each electron that previously occupied a 
patomic orbitalsurrounding an individual carbon nucleus now surrounds the entire part of the

molecule that is included in the interacting porbitals.ppppsp-bondingpCHCH3CH2HCCH3CHCH2CH2CHOCH3CH2OCH3HCH3CH3Kenichi Fukui (1918Ð1998)
wasborn in Japan. He was a professor at

Kyoto University until 1982 when he

became president of the Kyoto

Institute of Technology. He was the

first Japanese to receive the Nobel

Prize in chemistry.
Roald Hoffmannwas born inPoland in 1937 and came to the

United States when he was 12. He
received a B.S. from Columbia and a

Ph.D. from Harvard. When the

conservation of orbital symmetry
theory was proposed,he and

Woodward were both on the faculty

at Harvard. Hoffmann is presently a

professor of chemistry at Cornell.
AU:OK bulleted list here?
Please check
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 104
Section 29.2Molecular Orbitals and Orbital Symmetry
105energy of thep atomic orbitalsout-of-phasein-phasemolecularorbitalsenergy levelspossiblealignmentof p orbitalsantibonding    molecular orbitalenergy of p atomic orbitalsEnergy21bonding
    molecular orbitalnodeFigure 29.1
Interaction of in-phase patomic orbitals gives a bonding molecular orbital that is lower
in energy than the patomic orbitals. Interaction of out-of-phase atomic orbitals gives an
antibonding *molecular orbital that is higher in energy than the patomic orbitals.pppOrbitals are conservedÑtwo atomic
orbitals combine to produce two

molecular orbitals, four atomic orbitals
combine to produce four molecular

orbitals, six atomic orbitals combine to
produce six molecular orbitals, etc.
1Because the different phases of the 
porbital result from the different mathematical signs (and
) of the wave function of the electron,some chemists represent the different phases by a 
and a .A molecular orbital description of ethene is shown in Figure29.1. (To show the
different phases of the two lobes of a 
porbital,one phase is represented by a blue
lobe and the other phase by a green lobe.)1Because ethene has one bond,it has
two 
patomic orbitals that combine to produce two molecular orbitals. The in-
phase interaction of the two 
patomic orbitals gives a 
bonding molecularorbital,designated by (is the Greek letter psi). The bonding molecular orbital
is of lower energy than the isolated 
patomic orbitals. The two 
patomic orbitals ofethene can also interact out-of-phase. Interaction of out-of-phase orbitals gives an

antibonding molecular orbital
,which is of higher energy than the 
patom-ic orbitals. The bonding molecular orbital results from additive interaction of the

atomic orbitals,whereas the antibonding molecular orbital results from subtractive

interaction. In other words,the interaction of in-phase orbitals holds atoms togeth-

er,while the interaction of out-of-phase orbitals pushes atoms apart. Because elec-

trons reside in the available molecular orbitals with the lowest energy and two

electrons can occupy a molecular orbital,the two electrons of ethene reside in the

bonding molecular orbital. This molecular orbital picture describes all molecules

with one carbonÐcarbon double bond.ppc2,P*cc1Ppp1,3-Butadiene has two conjugated bonds,so it has four 
patomic orbitals(Figure29.2). Four atomic orbitals can combine linearly in four different ways. Con-

sequently,there are four molecular orbitals:and Notice that orbitals

are conserved:Four atomic orbitals combine to produce four molecular orbitals. Half

are bonding molecular orbitals (and ) and the other half are antibonding molecu-

lar orbitals (and ). Because the four electrons will reside in the available

molecular orbitals with the lowest energy,two electrons are in and two are in 

Remember that although the molecular orbitals have different energies,they are all

valid and they all coexist. This molecular orbital picture describes all molecules with

two conjugated 
carbonÐcarbon double bonds.c2.c1pc4c3c2c1c4.c1, c2, c3,ppBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 105
106CHAPTER 29Pericyclic Reactionsmolecular orbitalsenergy levelsgroundstateexcitedstateenergy of thep atomic orbitalsEnergy4321nodeFigure 29.2
Four patomic orbitals interact to give the four molecular orbitals of 1,3-butadiene.
pIf youexamine the interacting orbitals in Figure29.2,you will see that in-phase
orbitals interact to give a bonding interaction and out-of-phase orbitals interact to

create a node. Recall that a node is a place in which there is zero probability of find-

ing an electron (Section1.5). You will also see that as the energy of the molecular

orbital increases,the number of bonding interactions decreases and the number of

nodes betweenthe nuclei increases. For example,has three bonding interactions
and zero nodes between the nuclei,has two bonding interactions and one node

between the nuclei,has one bonding interaction and two nodes between the nu-

clei,and has zero bonding interactions and three nodes between the nuclei.

Notice that a molecular orbital is bonding if the number of bonding interactions is

greater than the number of nodes between the nuclei,and a molecular orbital is an-

tibonding if the number of bonding interactions is fewer than the number of nodes

between the nuclei.The normal electronic configuration of a molecule is known as its 
ground state
. Inthe ground state of 1,3-butadiene,the 
highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)isand the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO)is If a molecule
absorbs light of an appropriate wavelength,the light will promote an electron from its

ground-state HOMO to its LUMO (from to ). The molecule is then in an

excited state.In the excited state,the HOMO is and the LUMO is 
In a ther-mal reaction the reactant is in its ground state; in a photochemical reaction the reac-

tant is in an excited state.
Some molecular orbitals are symmetricand some are asymmetric(also calleddissymetric),and they are easy to distinguish. If the 
porbitals at the ends of the mo-lecular orbital are in-phase (both have blue lobes on the top and green lobes on the

bottom),the molecular orbital is symmetric. If the two end 
porbitals are out-of-phase,the molecular orbital is asymmetric. In Figure 29.2,and are 
symmetricmolecular orbitalsand and are asymmetric molecular orbitals. Notice thatas the molecular orbitals increase in energy,they alternate in being symmetric and
c4c2c3c1c4.c3c3c2c3.c2,c4c3c2c1Tutorial:
Molecular orbitalspBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 106
Section 29.2Molecular Orbitals and Orbital Symmetry
107molecular orbitalsground stateEnergy6excited state54321energy levelsenergy of thep atomic orbitalsFigure 29.3
Six patomic orbitals interact to give the six molecular orbitals of 1,3,5-hexatriene.
pThe ground-state HOMO and the
excited-state HOMO have opposite
symmetries.asymmetric. Therefore,the ground-state HOMO and the excited-state HOMO always
have opposite symmetriesÑone is symmetric and the other is asymmetric.A molecu-lar orbital description of 1,3,5-hexatriene,a compound with three conjugated double

bonds,is shown in Figure29.3. As a review,examine the figure and note
¥the distribution of electrons in the ground and excited states
¥that the number of bonding interactions decreases and the number of nodes
increases as the molecular orbitals increase in energy
¥that the molecular orbitals alternate from symmetric to asymmetric as the
molecular orbitals increase in energy
Although the chemistry of a compound is determined by all its molecular orbitals,
we can learn a great deal about the chemistry of a compound by looking at only 

the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)and the lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital (LUMO). These two molecular orbitals are known as the 
frontier
orbitals. We will now see that simply by evaluating 
oneof the frontier molecularorbitals of the reactant(s) in a pericyclic reaction,we can predict the conditions under

which the reaction will occur (thermal or photochemical,or both) and the products

that will be formed.BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 107
108CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsPROBLEM 2Answer the following questions for the molecular orbitals of 1,3,5-hexatriene:
a.Which are the bonding orbitals,and which are the antibonding orbitals?
b.Which orbitals are the HOMO and the LUMO in the ground state?

c.Which orbitals are the HOMO and the LUMO in the excited state?

d.Which orbitals are symmetric,and which are asymmetric?
e.What is the relationship between HOMO and LUMO and symmetric and asymmetric
orbitals?PROBLEM 3a.How many molecular orbitals does 1,3,5,7-octatetraene have?
b.What is the designation of its HOMO (etc.)?

c.How many nodes does its highest-energy molecular orbital have between the nuclei?
PROBLEM 4Give a molecular orbital description for each of the following:
a.1,3-pentadienec.1,3,5-heptatriene
b.1,4-pentadiened.1,3,5,8-nonatetraene
29.3Electrocyclic Reactions
An electrocyclic reaction
is an intramolecular reaction in which the rearrangement of electrons leads to a cyclic product that has one fewer bond than the reactant. An elec-

trocyclic reaction is completely stereoselective
Ñit preferentially forms one stereoiso-mer. For example,when (2
E,4Z,6E)-octatriene undergoes an electrocyclic reaction
under thermal conditions,only the cis product is formed; when (2
E,4Z,6Z)-octatrieneundergoes an electrocyclic reaction under thermal conditions,only the trans product is

formed. Recall that Emeans the high-priority groups are on opposite sides of the 
double bond,and 
Zmeans the high-priority groups are on the same side of the doublebond (Section3.5).
However,when the reactions are carried out under photochemical conditions,the
products have opposite configurations:The compound that forms the cis isomer under
CH3CH3CH3CH3(2E,4Z,6E)-octatrienecis-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneHH34567821CH3CH3(2E,4Z,6Z)-octatrienetrans-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneCH3CH3HHpppc1, c2,ppBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 108
Section 29.3Electrocyclic Reactions
109thermal conditions forms the trans isomer under photochemical conditions,and the
compound that forms the trans isomer under thermal conditions forms the cis isomer

under photochemical conditions.Under thermal conditions,(2
E,4Z)-hexadiene cyclizes to 
cis-3,4-dimethylcyclobutene,
and (2E,4E)-hexadiene cyclizes to 
trans
-3,4-dimethylcyclobutene.
As we saw with the octatrienes,the configuration of the product changes if the re-
actions are carried out under photochemical conditions:The trans isomer is obtained

from (2E,4Z)-hexadiene instead of the cis isomer; the cis isomer is obtained from
(2E,4E)-hexadiene instead of the trans isomer.
CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3(2E,4Z)-hexadienetrans-3,4-dimethylcyclobuteneHcis-3,4-dimethylcyclobuteneHH(2E,4E)-hexadieneHHHHhHhCH3CH3CH3CH3trans-3,4-dimethylcyclobutene(2E,4E)-hexadieneHHHHHCH3HHCH3HCH3CH3345621(2E,4Z)-hexadienecis-3,4-dimethylcyclobuteneCH3(2E,4Z,6E)-octatrienecis-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneHHCH3CH3CH3(2E,4Z,6Z)-octatrienetrans-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneCH3CH3hhCH3HCH3HBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 109
110CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsElectrocyclicreactions are reversible. The cyclic compound is favored for electro-
cyclic reactions that form six-membered rings,whereas the open-chain compound is

favored for electrocyclic reactions that form four-membered rings because of the angle

strain and torsional strain associated with four-membered rings (Section2.11).
Now we will use what we have learned about molecular orbitals to explain the con-
figuration of the products of the previous reactions. We will then be able to predict the

configuration of the product of any other electrocyclic reaction.
The product of an electrocyclic reaction results from the formation of a new 
bond. For this bond to form,the 
porbitals at the ends of the conjugated system must
rotate so they overlap head-to-head (and rehybridize to ). Rotation can occur in 

two ways. If both orbitals rotate in the same direction (both clockwise or both

counterclockwise),ring closure is 
conrotatory.
If the orbitals rotate in opposite directions (one clockwise,the other counter-
clockwise),ring closure is 
disrotatory
.The mode of ring closure depends on the symmetry of the HOMO of the compoundundergoing ring closure. Only the symmetry of the HOMO is important in determining

the course of the reaction because this is where the highest energy electrons are. These

are the most loosely held electrons and therefore the ones most easily moved during a

reaction.To form the new bond,the orbitals must rotate so that in-phase 
porbitalsoverlap,because in-phase overlap is a bonding interaction. Out-of-phase overlap

would be an antibonding interaction. If the HOMO is symmetric (the end orbitals are

identical),rotation will have to be disrotatory to achieve in-phase overlap. In other

words,disrotatory ring closure is symmetry-allowed,whereas conrotatory ring clo-

sure is symmetry-forbidden.If the HOMO is asymmetric,rotation has to be conrotatory in order to achieve in-
phase overlap. In other words,conrotatory ring closure is symmetry-allowed,whereas

disrotatory ring closure is symmetry-forbidden.disrotatoryring closureHOMO is symmetricsring closure isdisrotatoryring closure isconrotatorysp3sTutorial:
Electrocyclic reactionsBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 110
Section 29.3Electrocyclic Reactions
111A symmetry-allowed pathway requires
in-phase orbital overlap.Notice that a symmetry-allowed pathway
is one in which in-phase orbitals overlap;
a symmetry-forbidden pathway
is one in which out-of-phase orbitals would overlap. A
symmetry-allowed reaction can take place under relatively mild conditions. If a reaction

is symmetry-forbidden,it cannot take place by a concerted pathway. If a symmetry-

forbidden reaction takes place at all,it must do so by a nonconcerted mechanism.
Now we are ready to learn why the electrocyclic reactions discussed at the begin-
ning of this section form the indicated products,and why the configuration of the

product changes if the reaction is carried out under photochemical conditions.The ground-state HOMO of a compound with three conjugated bonds,such
as (2E,4Z,6E)-octatriene,is symmetric (Figure29.3). This means that ring closure under
thermal conditionsis disrotatory. In disrotatory ring closure of (2
E,4Z,6E)-octatriene,the methyl groups are both pushed up (or down),which results in formation of the 

cis product.In disrotatory ring closure of (2E,4Z,6Z)-octatriene,one methyl group is pushed up
and the other is pushed down,which results in formation of the trans product.
If the reaction takes place under 
photochemical conditions,
we must consider theexcited-state HOMO rather than the ground-state HOMO. The excited-state HOMO
of a compound with three bonds is asymmetric (Figure29.3). Therefore,under
photochemical conditions,(2
E,4Z,6Z)-octatriene undergoes conrotatory ring closure,
so both methyl groups are pushed down (or up) and the cis product is formed.
conrotatoryring closureh  (2E,4Z,6Z)-octatrienecis-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneH3CCH3HHHCH3HCH
3pc4(2E,4Z,6Z)-octatrienetrans-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneH3CCH3CH3CH3HHHHdisrotatoryring closuredisrotatoryring closure(2E,4Z,6E)-octatrienecis-5,6-dimethyl-1,3-cyclohexadieneH3CH3CCH3CH3HHHHpc3The symmetry of the HOMO of thecompound undergoing ring closure

controls the stereochemical outcome 

of an electrocyclic reaction.
Missing Art AABRBDT0
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 111
112CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsThe ground-state HOMO of a compound
with an even number of conjugated
double bonds is asymmetric.We have just seen why the configuration of the product formed under photochemi-
cal conditions is the opposite of the configuration of the product formed under thermal

conditions:The ground-state HOMO is symmetric
Ñso disrotatory ring closure oc-curs,whereas the excited-state HOMO is asymmetric
Ñso conrotatory ring closure oc-curs. Thus,the stereochemical outcome of an electrocyclic reaction depends on the

symmetry of the HOMO of the compound undergoing ring closure.
Now let
Õs see why ring closure of (2E,4Z)-hexadiene forms 
cis-3,4-dimethyl-cyclobutene. The compound undergoing ring closure has two conjugated bonds. The

ground-state HOMO of a compound with two conjugated bonds is asymmetric

(Figure29.2),so ring closure is conrotatory. Conrotatory ring closure of (2
E,4Z)-hexadiene leads to the cis product.
Similarly,conrotatory ring closure of (2
E,4E)-hexadiene leads to the trans product.
If the reaction is carried out under photochemical conditions,however,the excited-
state HOMO of a compound with two conjugated bonds is symmetric. (Recall that

the ground-state HOMO and the excited-state HOMO have opposite symmetries.) 

So (2E,4Z)-hexadiene will undergo disrotatory ring closure,resulting in the trans
product,whereas (2
E,4E)-hexadiene will undergo disrotatory ring closure and form
the cis product.We have seen that the ground-state HOMO of a compound with two conjugated
double bonds is asymmetric,whereas the ground-state HOMO of a compound with

three conjugated double bonds is symmetric. If we examine molecular orbital diagrams

for compounds with four,five,six,and more conjugated double bonds,we can con-

clude that the ground-state HOMO of a compound with an even number of conjugated
double bonds is asymmetric,whereas the ground-state HOMO of a compound with an

odd number of conjugated double bonds is symmetric.
Therefore,from the number of
conjugated double bonds in a compound,we can immediately tell whether ring closure

will be conrotatory (an even number of conjugated double bonds) or disrotatory (an odd

number of conjugated double bonds) under thermal conditions. However,if the reaction

takes place under photochemical conditions,everything is reversed since the ground-

state and excited-state HOMOs have opposite symmetries; if the ground-state HOMO

is symmetric,the excited-state HOMO is asymmetric and vice versa.
We have seen that the stereochemistry of an electrocyclic reaction depends on the
mode of ring closure,and the mode of ring closure depends on the number of conju-

gated bonds in the reactant 
andon whether the reaction is carried out under thermalor photochemical conditions. What we have learned about electrocyclic reactions can

be summarized by the 
selection ruleslisted in Table29.1. These are also known as the
Woodward
ÐHoffmann rulesfor electrocyclic reactions.
The rules in Table29.1are for determining whether a given electrocyclic reaction is
Òallowed by orbital symmetry.
ÓThere are also selection rules to determine whether cy-
cloaddition reactions (Table29.3) and sigmatropic rearrangements (Table29.4) are
ppconrotatoryring closure(2E,4E)-hexadienetrans-3,4-dimethylcyclobuteneH3CCH3HHH3CHHCH3conrotatoryring closure(2E,4Z)-hexadienecis-3,4-dimethylcyclobuteneH3CCH3HHCH3HHCH3ppThe ground-state HOMO of a compound
with an odd number of conjugated
double bonds is symmetric.BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 112
Section 29.3Electrocyclic Reactions
113Table 29.1Woodward
ÐHoffmann Rules for Electrocyclic Reactions
Number ofAllowed mode
conjugated bondsReaction conditionsof ring closure
Even numberThermalConrotatory
PhotochemicalDisrotatory
Odd numberThermalDisrotatory
PhotochemicalConrotatory
pÒallowed by orbital symmetry.
ÓIt can be rather burdensome to memorize these rules
(and worrisome if they are forgotten during an exam),but all the rules can be summa-

rized by the mnemonic 
ÒTE-AC.
ÓHow to use 
ÒTE-AC
Óis explained in Section29.7.
PROBLEM 5a.For conjugated systems with two,three,four,five,six,and seven conjugated bonds,
construct quick molecular orbitals (just draw the 
porbitals at the ends of the conjugat-
ed system as they are drawn on p.000) to show whether the HOMO is symmetric or

asymmetric).b.Using these drawings,convince yourself that the Woodward
ÐHoffmann rules in
Table29.1are valid.
c.Using these drawings,convince yourself that the 
ÒTE-AC
Óshortcut method for learningthe information in Table29.1is valid (see Section29.7).
PROBLEM 6a.Under thermal conditions,will ring closure of (2
E,4Z,6Z,8E)-decatetraene be conrota-tory or disrotatory?b.Will the product have the cis or the trans configuration?

c.Under photochemical conditions,will ring closure be conrotatory or disrotatory?

d.Will the product have the cis or the trans configuration?
The series of reactions in Figure29.4illustrates just how easy it is to determine the
mode of ring closure and therefore the product of an electrocyclic reaction. The

reactant of the first reaction has three conjugated double bonds and is undergoing ring

closure under thermal conditions. Ring closure,therefore,is disrotatory (Table29.1).

Disrotatory ring closure of this reactant causes the hydrogens to be cis in the ring-
closed product. To determine the relative positions of the hydrogens,draw them in the

reactant and then draw arrows showing disrotatory ring closure (Figure29.4a).
pX-Ref100 C20 C25 Cabc
HHHHHHHHHHh  disrotatoryring closureconrotatoryring closuredisrotatoryring closureFigure 29.4
Determining the stereochemistry ofthe product of an electrocyclic
reaction.BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 113
PROBLEM 7Which of the following are correct? Correct any false statements.
a.A conjugated diene with an even number of double bonds undergoes conrotatory ring
closure under thermal conditions.b.A conjugated diene with an asymmetric HOMO undergoes conrotatory ring closure
under thermal conditions.c.A conjugated diene with an odd number of double bonds has a symmetric HOMO.
PROBLEM 8a.Identify the mode of ring closure for each of the following electrocyclic reactions.

b.Are the indicated hydrogens cis or trans?
1.2.
29.4Cycloaddition ReactionsIn a cycloaddition reaction,
two different bond
Ðcontaining molecules react toform a cyclic molecule by rearranging the electrons and forming two new 

bonds. The Diels
ÐAlder reaction is one of the best known examples of a cycloaddi-
tion reaction (Section8.8). Cycloaddition reactions are classified according to the
sppHHHH114CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsTable 29.2Configuration of the Product of an Electrocyclic Reaction
SubstituentsConfiguration
in the reactantMode of ring closureof the product
Point in opposite directionsDisrotatorycis
Conrotatorytrans
Point in the same directionDisrotatorytrans
Conrotatorycis
The second step is a ring-opening electrocyclic reaction that takes place under
photochemical conditions. Because of the principle of microscopic reversibility

(Section15.12),the orbital symmetry rules used for a ring-closure reaction also apply to

the reverse ring-opening reaction. The compound undergoing reversible ring closure has

three conjugated double bonds. Because the reaction occurs under photochemical condi-

tions,ring opening (and ring closure) is conrotatory. (Notice that the number of conju-

gated double bonds used to determine the mode of ring opening/closure in reversible

electrocyclic reactions is the number in the compound undergoing ring closure.) If con-

rotatory rotation is to result in a product with cis hydrogens,the hydrogens in the com-

pound undergoing ring closure must point in the same direction (Figure29.4b).
The third step is a thermal ring closure of a compound with three conjugated doublebonds,so ring closure is disrotatory. Drawing the hydrogens and the arrows (Figure29.4c)

allows you to determine the relative positions of the hydrogens in the ring-closed product.
Notice that in all these electrocyclic reactions,if the bonds to the substituents in the
reactant point in opposite directions
(as in Figure29.4a),the substituents will be cis in
the product if ring closure is disrotatory and trans if ring closure is conrotatory. On the

other hand,if they point in the 
same direction
(as in Figure29.4bor 29.4c),they will
be trans in the product if ring closure is disrotatory and cis if ring closure is conrota-
tory (Table29.2).
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 114
Section 29.4Cycloaddition Reactions
115number of electrons that interact in the reaction. The Diels
ÐAlder reaction is acycloaddition reaction because one reactant has four interacting electrons
and the other reactant has two interacting electrons. Only the electrons partici-

pating in electron rearrangement are counted.In a cycloaddition reaction,the orbitals of one molecule must overlap with the
orbitals of the second molecule. Therefore,the frontier molecular orbitals of both

reactants must be evaluated to determine the outcome of the reaction. Because the new
bonds in the product are formed by donation of electron density from one reactant to
the other reactant,we must consider the HOMO of one of the molecules and the

LUMO of the other because only an empty orbital can accept electrons. It does not

matter which reacting moleculeÕs HOMO is used. It is required only that we use the
HOMO of one and the LUMO of the other.
There are two modes of orbital overlap for the simultaneous formation of two 
bondsÑsuprafacial
and antarafacial
. Bond formation is suprafacialif both bonds form on the same side of the system. Bond formation is 
antarafacialif thetwo bonds form on opposite sides of the system. Suprafacial bond formation is

similar to syn addition,whereas antarafacial bond formation resembles anti addi-

tion (Section5.19).
suprafacialbond formationantarafacialbond formationpspsssCH3OCCCCOCH
3CH2OO[8 + 2] cycloadditionCO2CH3CO2CH3H3CH3COOOH3CH3COOO[4 + 2] cycloaddition (a DielsÐAlder reaction)
[2 + 2] cycloadditionH3CCCH3CH2OH3CH3COhppp[42]pBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 115
116CHAPTER 29Pericyclic Reactionsthermal conditionsphotochemical conditions
ground-state HOMOexcited-state HOMO
LUMOLUMOFigure 29.6
Frontier molecular orbital analysisof a cycloaddition reaction

under thermal and photochemical
conditions.[22]overlapping orbitals havethe same color (are in-phase)dienedienophileHOMOdienedienophileLUMOLUMOHOMOFigure 29.5
Frontier molecular orbital analysisof a cycloaddition reaction.

The HOMO of either of the
reactants can be used with the
LUMO of the other. Both situations

require suprafacial overlap 
for bond formation.[42]A cycloaddition reaction that forms a four-,five-,or six-membered ring must involve
suprafacial bond formation. The geometric constraints of these small rings make the

antarafacial approach highly unlikely even if it is symmetry-allowed. (Remember that

symmetry-allowed means the overlapping orbitals are in-phase.) Antarafacial bond

formation is more likely in cycloaddition reactions that form larger rings.
Frontier orbital analysis
of a cycloaddition reaction shows that overlap of
in-phase orbitals to form the two new bonds requires suprafacial orbital overlap

(Figure29.5). This is true whether we use the LUMO of the dienophile (a system with

one bond; Figure29.1) and the HOMO of the diene (a system with two conjugated 

bonds; Figure29.2) or the HOMO of the dienophile and the LUMO of the diene. Now

we can understand why DielsÐAlder reactions occur with relative ease (Section8.8).
pps[42]Tutorial:
Cycloaddition reactionsA cycloaddition reaction does not occur under thermal conditions but does
take place under photochemical conditions.
Thefrontier molecular orbitals in Figure29.6show why this is so. Under thermal con-
ditions,suprafacial overlap is not symmetry-allowed (the overlapping orbitals are out-

of-phase). Antarafacial overlap is symmetry-allowed but is not possible because of the

small size of the ring. Under photochemical conditions,however,the reaction can take

place because the symmetry of the excited-state HOMO is opposite that of the ground-

state HOMO. Therefore,overlap of the excited-state HOMO of one alkene with the

LUMO of the second alkene involves symmetry-allowed suprafacial bond formation.
hno reaction[22]BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 116
Section 29.4Cycloaddition Reactions
117Table 29.3Woodward
ÐHoffmann Rules for Cycloaddition Reactions
Sum of the number ofbonds in the reactingAllowed mode
systems of both reagentsReaction conditionsof ring closure
Even numberThermalAntarafacial
aPhotochemicalSuprafacial
Odd numberThermalSuprafacial
PhotochemicalAntarafacial
aaAlthough antarafacial ring closure is symmetry-allowed,it can occur only with large rings.
pNotice in the photochemical reaction that only one of the reactants is in an excited
state. Because of the very short lifetimes of excited states,it is unlikely that two reac-

tants in their excited states would find one another to interact. The selection rules for

cycloaddition reactions are summarized in Table29.3.
solution of diphenyloxalate and a dye. When the vial breaks,two
nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions occur that form a com-

pound with an unstable four-membered ring. Recall that

phenoxide ion is a relatively good leaving group (Section17.10).
Suprafacial overlap to form a four-membered ring can take
place only under photochemical conditions,so one of the

reactants must be in an excited state. Therefore,one of the two

carbon dioxide molecules formed when the four-membered

ring breaks is in an excited state (indicated by an asterisk).

When the electron in the excited state drops down to the ground

state,a photon of ultraviolet light is released
Ñwhich is notvisible to the human eye. However,in the presence of a dye,the

excited carbon dioxide molecule can transfer some of its energy

to the dye molecule,which causes an electron in the dye to be

promoted to an excited state. When the electron of the dye
COOOOCCO
OOCOHH
2OCOOOOOOOOOHHOOOCOHOOH
COOOCOOCOOCOOOCOCOH2OHOHOOOCOCOCOOCO*OCOOdyedye*visiblelightdyehas an electron inan excited stateCOLD LIGHTA reverse cycloaddition reaction is
responsible for the cold light given off by light
sticks. A light stick contains a thin glass vial that holds a mixture

of sodium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide suspended in a[22]drops down to the ground state,a photon of visible light is
releasedÑwhich isvisible to the human eye. In Section29.6
you will see that a similar reaction is responsible for the light
given off by fireflies.
PROBLEM 9Explain why maleic anhydride reacts rapidly with 1,3-butadiene but does not react at all

with ethene under thermal conditions.OOOmaleic anhydrideBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 117
118CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsPROBLEM 10SOLVED
Compare the reaction of 2,4,6-cycloheptatrienone with cyclopentadiene to that with
ethene. Why does 2,4,6-cycloheptatrienone use two electrons in one reaction and four 

electrons in the other?ppa.b.
CH2CH2OOOOSOLUTIONBoth reactions are cycloaddition reactions. When 2,4,6-cyclohep-
tatrienone reacts with cyclopentadiene,it uses two of its electrons because cyclopentadi-

ene is the reactant. When 2,4,6-cycloheptatrienone reacts with ethene,it

uses four of its electrons because ethene is the two--electron reactant.
a.b.
PROBLEM 11Will a concerted reaction take place between 1,3-butadiene and 2-cyclohexenone in the
presence of ultraviolet light?
29.5Sigmatropic Rearrangements
The last class of concerted pericyclic reactions that we will consider is the group of re-
actions known as 
sigmatropic rearrangements.
In a sigmatropic rearrangement
,a 
bond in the reactant is broken,a new bond is formed,and the electrons rearrange.

The bond that breaks is a bond to an allylic carbon. It can be a bond between a

carbon and a hydrogen,between a carbon and another carbon,or between a carbon and

an oxygen,nitrogen,or sulfur. 
ÒSigmatropicÓcomes from the Greek word 
tropos,
which means Òchange,Óso sigmatropic means Òsigma-change.ÓThe numbering system used to describe a sigmatropic rearrangement differs from
any numbering system you have seen previously. First,mentally break the bond in

the reactant and give a number 1 label to the atoms that were attached by the bond.

Then look at the new bond in the product. Count the number of atoms in each of

the fragments that connect the broken bond and the new bond. The two numbers

are put in brackets with the smaller number stated first. For example,in the follow-

ing [2,3] sigmatropic rearrangement,two atoms (N,N) connect the old and new 

bonds in one fragment and three atoms (C,C,C) connect the old and new bonds in

the other fragment.a [1,5] sigmatropic rearrangement
CH3CHCH2CH3CHCHCHCH
CH2CHCHCHHHnew bond formedbond broken12345
111223CH3CH3new bond formeda [2,3] sigmatropic rearrangement
NRNRN
Nbond brokensssssssspssOCH2CH2Oppfour-p-electronp[42]AU:OK as changed?
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 118
PROBLEM 12a.Name the kind of sigmatropic rearrangement that occurs in each of the following reactions.
b.Using arrows,show the electron rearrangement that takes place in each of the reactions.
1.3.
2.4.
In the transition state of a sigmatropic rearrangement,the group that migrates is
partially bonded to the migration origin and partially bonded to the migration terminus.
There are two possible modes for rearrangement. If the migrating group remains on the

same face of the system,the rearrangement is 
suprafacial. If the migrating groupmoves to the opposite face of the system,the rearrangement is 
antarafacial.Sigmatropic rearrangements have cyclic transition states. If the transition state has six
or fewer atoms in the ring,rearrangement must be suprafacial because of the geometric

constraints of small rings.A [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangement involves a bond and a pair of electrons,or
we can say that it involves two pairs of electrons. A [1,5] sigmatropic rearrangement

involves two bonds and a pair of electrons (three pairs of electrons),and a [1,7]

sigmatropic rearrangement involves four pairs of electrons. The symmetry rules for

sigmatropic rearrangements are nearly the same as those for cycloaddition reactions
Ñthe only difference is that we count the number of pairs of electrons rather than the

number of bonds? (Compare Tables 29.3and 29.4.) 
Recall that the ground-state
HOMO of a compound with an even number of conjugated double bonds is asym-

metric,whereas the ground-state HOMO of a compound with an odd number of

conjugated double bonds is symmetric.pspspsuprafacial rearrangementmigrationoriginmigrating groupmigrationterminusantarafacial rearrangementmigrationoriginmigrating groupmigrationterminusppCH2CH3CH3CH2CH3CH2CH2CH3OOnew bond formedbond broken112233a [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement
a [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangement
CH3CCHCH2CHCH2CH3CH3CH3CCH3CH3new bond formedbond broken1123
Section 29.5Sigmatropic Rearrangements
119CH3HOOCH3BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 119
A Cope2rearrangement
is a [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement of a 1,5-diene. A
Claisen3rearrangement
is a [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement of an allyl vinyl ether.
Both rearrangements form six-membered-ring transition states. The reactions,therefore,

must be able to take place by a suprafacial pathway. Whether or not a suprafacial path-

way is symmetry-allowed depends on the number of pairs of electrons involved in the

rearrangement (Table29.4). Because [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangements involve three

pairs of electrons,they occur by a suprafacial pathway under thermal conditions. There-

fore,both Cope and Claisen rearrangements readily take place under thermal conditions.
PROBLEM 13a.Give the product of the following reaction:
b.If the terminal carbon of the substituent bonded to the benzene ring is labeled with
where will the label be in the product?Migration of Hydrogen
When a hydrogen migrates in a sigmatropic rearrangement,the 
sorbital of hydrogen ispartially bonded to both the migration origin and the migration terminus in the transition
state. Therefore,a [1,3] sigmatropic migration of hydrogen involves a four-membered-

ring transition state. Because two pairs of electrons are involved,the HOMO is asym-

metric. The selection rules,therefore,require an antarafacial rearrangement for a

1,3-hydrogen shift under thermal conditions (Table29.4). Consequently,1,3-hydrogen

shifts do not occur under thermal conditions because the four-membered-ring transition

state does not allow the required antarafacial rearrangement.
suprafacial rearrangementmigration of hydrogenantarafacial rearrangement 14C,sp2OCH3a Claisen rearrangementOOCH3C6H5a Cope rearrangementCH3C6H5CH3120CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsTutorial:
Sigmatropic rearrangementsTable 29.4Woodward
ÐHoffmann Rules for Sigmatropic Rearrangements
Number of pairs of electronsAllowed mode
in the reacting systemReaction conditionsof ring closure
Even numberThermalAntarafacial
aPhotochemicalSuprafacial
Odd numberThermalSuprafacial
PhotochemicalAntarafacial
aaAlthough antarafacial ring closure is symmetry-allowed,it can occur only with large rings.
X-Ref2Cope also discovered the Cope elimination (p.000).
3Claisen also discovered the Claisen condensation (p.000).
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 120
1,3-Hydrogen shifts can take place if the reaction is carried out under photochemi-
cal conditions because the HOMO is symmetric under photochemical conditions,
which means that hydrogen can migrate by a suprafacial pathway (Table29.4).
Two products are obtained in the previous reaction because two different allylic
hydrogens can undergo a 1,3-hydrogen shift.
[1,5] Sigmatropic migrations of hydrogen are well known. They involve three pairs
of electrons,so they take place by a suprafacial pathway under thermal conditions.
PROBLEM 14Why was a deuterated compound used in the preceding example?
PROBLEM 15Account for the difference in the products obtained under photochemical and thermal
conditions.[1,7] Sigmatropic hydrogen migrations involve four pairs of electrons. They can
take place under thermal conditions because the eight-membered-ring transition state

allows the required antarafacial rearrangement.
CHHCH2C4H9C4H9CH31,7-hydrogen shiftCD3hCD2DCD3CD2DHCH2CH3CH3CH3HCD2CD2H1,5-hydrogen shiftshHhHh1,3-hydrogen shiftsSection 29.5Sigmatropic Rearrangements
121BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 121
PROBLEM 16SOLVED
5-Methyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene rearranges to give a mixture of 5-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadi-
ene,1-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene,and 2-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene. Show how these

products are formed.SOLUTIONNotice that both equilibria involve [1,5] sigmatropic rearrangements.
Although a hydride moves from one carbon to an adjacent carbon,the rearrangements are

not called 1,2-shifts because this would not account for all the atoms involved in the

rearranged electron system.
Migration of CarbonUnlike hydrogen,which can migrate in only one way because of its spherical 
sorbital,carbon has two ways to migrate because it has a two-lobed 
porbital. Carbon cansimultaneously interact with the migration origin and the migration terminus using
one of its lobes.Carbon can also simultaneously interact with the migration source and the migrationterminus using both lobes of its porbital.If the reaction requires a suprafacial rearrangement,carbon will migrate using one
of its lobes if the HOMO is symmetric and will migrate using both of its lobes if the
HOMO is asymmetric.When carbon migrates with only one of its plobes interacting with the migrationsource and migration terminus,the migrating group retains its configuration because

bonding is always to the same lobe. When carbon migrates with both of its 
plobes in-teracting,bonding in the reactant and bonding in the product involve different lobes.

Therefore,migration occurs with inversion of configuration.
CCsuprafacial rearrangementantarafacial rearrangement
carbon migrating with both of its lobes interactingCCsuprafacial rearrangementantarafacial rearrangement
carbon migrating with one of its lobes interactingHCH35-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene1-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene2-methyl-1,3-cyclopentadieneCH3HHHCH3Hp122CHAPTER 29Pericyclic ReactionsBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 122
Section 29.6Pericyclic Reactions in Biological Systems
123The following [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangement has a four-membered-ring transi-
tion state that requires a suprafacial pathway. The reacting system has two pairs of

electrons,so its HOMO is asymmetric. Therefore,the migrating carbon interacts with

the migration source and the migration terminus using both of its lobes,so it under-

goes inversion of configuration.
PROBLEM 17[1,3] Sigmatropic migrations of hydrogen cannot occur under thermal conditions,but [1,3]
sigmatropic migrations of carbon can occur under thermal conditions. Explain.PROBLEM 18a.Will thermal 1,3-migrations of carbon occur with retention or inversion of configuration?
b.Will thermal 1,5-migrations of carbon occur with retention or inversion of configuration?
29.6Pericyclic Reactions in Biological SystemsBiological Cycloaddition ReactionsExposure to ultraviolet light causes skin cancer. This is one of the reasons why many
scientists are concerned about the thinning ozone layer. The ozone layer absorbs ultra-

violet radiation high in the atmosphere,protecting organisms on Earth
Õs surface
(Section9.9). One cause of skin cancer is the formation of 
thymine dimers.
At any
point in DNA where there are two adjacent thymine residues (Section27.1),a 

cycloaddition reaction can occur,resulting in the formation of a thymine dimer. Be-

cause cycloaddition reactions take place only under photochemical condi-

tions,the reaction takes place only in the presence of ultraviolet light.
Thymine dimers can cause cancer because they interfere with the structural integrity of
DNA. Any modification of DNA structure can lead to mutations and possibly to cancer.
Fortunately,there are enzymes that repair damaged DNA. When a repair enzyme
recognizes a thymine dimer,it reverses the cycloaddition reaction to regener-

ate the original T
ÐT sequence. Repair enzymes,however,are not perfect,and some
damage always remains uncorrected. People who do not have the repair enzyme

(called DNA photolyase) that removes thymine dimers rarely live beyond the age of

20. Fortunately,this genetic defect is rare.
Fireflies are one of several species that emit light as a result of a retro (i.e.,reverse)
cycloaddition reaction,similar to the reaction that produces the cold light in
light sticks (Section29.4). Fireflies have an enzyme (luciferase) that catalyzes the re-

action between luciferin,ATP,and molecular oxygen that forms a compound with an

unstable four-membered ring. When the four-membered ring breaks,an electron in
[22][22]hONHHNOONHONHONHHNOONHONHtwo adjacent thymine residues on DNAmutation-causing thymine dimer
[22][22]HCH3HCH3HCH3invertedconfigurationA firefly with its stomach aglow111100008888%%%%3-D Molecules:Thymine dimer; 
DNA photolyaseBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 123
124CHAPTER 29Pericyclic Reactionsoxyluciferin is promoted to an excited state because suprafacial overlap can occur only
under photochemical conditions. When the electron in the excited state drops down to

the ground state,a photon of light is released. In this case,the luciferin molecule acts

as both the source of the unstable four-membered ring and as the dye molecule that

had to be added to the cold-light reaction.A Biological Reaction Involving an Electrocyclic Reaction 
and a Sigmatropic Rearrangement
7-Dehydrocholesterol,a steroid found in skin,is converted into vitamin by two
pericyclic reactions. The first is an electrocyclic reaction that opens one of the six-

membered rings in the starting material to form provitamin This reaction occurs

under photochemical conditions. The provitamin then undergoes a [1,7] sigmatropic

rearrangement to form vitamin The sigmatropic rearrangement takes place under

thermal conditions and is slower than the electrocyclic reaction,so vitamin contin-

ues to be synthesized for several days after exposure to sunlight. Vitamin is not the

active form of the vitamin. The active form requires two successive hydroxylations of

vitamin Ñthe first occurs in the liver and the second in the kidneys.
D3D3D3D3.D3.D3luciferinluciferaseoxyluciferinHOSSNNHCOHATPOHOSSNNHCOAMPOHOSSNNCOAMPOOOHOSSNNCOAMPOOOOOHOSSNNCOAMP
OBOOOHOSSNNCO*HOSSNNOHOSSNNCO2lightan unstable four-membered ring
has an electron inan excited stateCH3HOH3CHHH3CCH3CH3CH3han electrocyclicreaction7-dehydrocholesterolHOH3CHH3CCH3CH3CH3provitamin D3a [1,7] sigmatropicrearrangementHOH2CHH3CCH3CH3vitamin D3BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 124
Summary125A deficiency in vitamin D,which can be prevented by getting enough sun,causes a
disease known as rickets. Rickets is characterized by deformed bones and stunted

growth. Too much vitamin D is also harmful because it causes the calcification of soft

tissues. It is thought that skin pigmentation evolved to protect the skin from the sun
Õsultraviolet rays in order to prevent the synthesis of too much vitamin This agrees

with the observation that peoples who are indigenous to countries close to the equator

have greater skin pigmentation.
PROBLEM 19Does the [1,7] sigmatropic rearrangement that converts provitamin to vitamin in-
volve suprafacial or antarafacial rearrangement?
PROBLEM 20Explain why photochemical ring closure of provitamin to form 7-dehydrocholesterol

results in the hydrogen and methyl substituents being trans to one another.
29.7Summary of the Selection Rulesfor Pericyclic ReactionsThe selection rules that determine the outcome of electrocyclic reactions,cycloaddi-
tion reactions,and sigmatropic rearrangements are summarized in Tables29.1,29.3,

and 29.4,respectively. This is still a lot to remember. Fortunately,the selection rules

for all pericyclic reactions can be summarized in one word:
ÒTE-AC
.Ó¥If TE(Thermal/Even) describes the reaction,the outcome 
is givenby AC(Anta-rafacial or 
Conrotatory).¥If one of the letters of TEis incorrect (it is not Thermal/Even but is 
Thermal/Odd or 
Photochemical/Even),the outcome 
is not given
by AC(the outcome isSuprafacial or 
Disrotatory).¥If both of the letters of TEare incorrect (Photochemical/Odd),the outcome 
isgivenby AC(Antarafacial or 
Conrotatory)ÑÒtwo negatives make a positive.
ÓD3D3D3D3.SummaryA pericyclic reaction
occurs when the electrons in thereactant(s) are reorganized in a cyclic manner. Pericyclic re-

actions are concerted,highly stereoselective reactions that

are generally not affected by catalysts or by a change in sol-

vent. The three most common types of pericyclic reactions

are electrocyclic reactions,cycloaddition reactions
,and
sigmatropic rearrangements
. The configuration of the prod-
uct of a pericyclic reaction depends on the configuration of

the reactant,the number of conjugated double bonds or

pairs of electrons in the reacting system,and whether the

reaction is thermalor photochemical. The outcome of
pericyclic reactions is given by a set of 
selection rules,which can be summarized by TE-AC
.The two lobes of a 
porbital have opposite phases. When
two in-phase atomic orbitals interact,a covalent bond is

formed; two out-of-phase orbitals interact to create a node.

The conservation of orbital symmetry theory states that in-
phase orbitals overlap during the course of a pericyclic
reaction; a symmetry-allowed pathway
is one in which in-
phase orbitals overlap. If the 
porbitals at the ends of the
molecular orbital are in-phase,the molecular orbital is

symmetric. If the two end 
porbitals are out-of-phase,the
molecular orbital is asymmetric.The ground-state HOMOof a compound with an even
number of conjugated double bonds or an even number of

pairs of electrons is asymmetric; the ground-state HOMOof a compound with an odd number of conjugated double

bonds or an odd number of pairs of electrons is symmetric.The ground-state
HOMO and the excited-stateHOMOhave opposite symmetries.
An electrocyclic reaction
is an intramolecular reactionin which a new (sigma) bond is formed between the ends

of a conjugated (pi) system. To form this new bond,
porbitals at the ends of the conjugated system rotate so they
spsBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 125
126CHAPTER 29Pericyclic Reactionscan engage in in-phase overlap. If both orbitals rotate in the
same direction,ring closure is 
conrotatory
; if they rotate in
opposite directions,it is 
disrotatory
. If the HOMO isasymmetric,conrotatory ring closure occurs:if it is sym-

metric,disrotatory ring closure occurs.
In a cycloaddition reaction
two different bond-
containing molecules react to form a cyclic compound by

rearranging the electrons and forming two new bonds.

Because a cycloaddition reaction involves two molecules,

the HOMO of one molecule and the LUMOof the othermust be considered. Bond formation is suprafacialif bothsppbonds form on the same side of the system; it is
antarafacialif the two bonds form on opposite sides of
the system. Formation of small rings occurs only by

suprafacial overlap.
In a sigmatropic rearrangement
,a bond is broken in
the reactant,a new bond is formed in the product,and the
bonds rearrange. If the migrating group remains on the
same face of the system,the rearrangement is 
suprafa-cial; if it moves to the opposite face of the system,it is
antarafacial.pppsspspsKey Terms
antarafacial bond formation (p.115)
antarafacial rearrangement (p.119)

antibonding *molecular orbital etc.(p.105)
asymmetric molecular orbital (p.106)

bonding molecular orbital (p.105)

Claisen rearrangement (p.120)

conrotatory ring closure (p.110)

conservation of orbital symmetry theory
(p.103)
Cope rearrangement (p.120)

cycloaddition reaction (p.102)

disrotatory ring closure (p.110)
ppelectrocyclic reaction (p.101)
excited state (p.106)

frontier orbital analysis (p.116)

frontier orbitals (p.107)

frontier orbital theory (p.107)

ground state (p.106)

highest occupied molecular orbital(HOMO) (p.107)
linear combination of atomic orbitals(LCAO) (p.104)
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
(LUMO) (p.107)
molecular orbital (MO) theory (p.104)
pericyclic reaction (p.101)
photochemical reaction (p.103)

polar reaction (p.101)

radical reaction (p.101)

selection rules (p.112)

sigmatropic rearrangement (p.102)

suprafacial bond formation (p.115)

suprafacial rearrangement (p.119)

symmetric molecular orbital (p.106)

symmetry-allowed pathway (p.111)

symmetry-forbidden pathway (p.111)

thermal reaction (p.103)

Woodward
ÐHoffmann rules (p.112)
Problems
21.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.d.g.
b.e.h.
c.f.
22.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3a.c.b.d.h  h  H3CH3CCH
3HHCH3H3CHHDDhhHCH3HCH322Author:circled words are not boldface in text.Fix there, or delete here?
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 126
Problems12723.Chorismate mutase is an enzyme that promotes a pericyclic reaction by forcing the substrate to assume the conformation neede
dfor the reaction. The product of the pericyclic reaction is prephenate,which is subsequently converted into the amino acids

phenylalanine and tyrosine. What kind of a pericyclic reaction does chorismate mutase catalyze?
24.Account for the difference in the products of the following reactions:
25.Show how norbornane could be prepared from cyclopentadiene.
26.Give the product formed when each of the following compounds undergoes an electrocyclic reaction
a.under thermal conditions

b.under photochemical conditions
1.2.
27.Give the product of each of the following reactions:
a.c.e.
b.d.
28.Which is the product of the following [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangement,A or B?
29.Dewar benzene is a highly strained isomer of benzene. In spite of its thermodynamic instability,it is very stable kineticall
y. It will
rearrange to benzene,but only if heated to a very high temperature. Why is it kinetically stable?
Dewar benzenevery slowOCCH3OHHDOCCH3OHDHDHHH3CCOOABOCH3CH3OCH3OHhCH3H3CCH3CH3norbornaneHHHHchorismateCOOHOHHOCCOOchorismate mutaseprephenateCH2OOCHOHCH2CCOOOBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 127
128CHAPTER 29Pericyclic Reactions30.If the following compounds are heated,one will form one product from a [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangement and the other will fo
rmtwo products from two different [1,3] sigmatropic rearrangements. Give the products of the reactions.
31.When the following compound is heated,a product is formed that shows an infrared absorption band at . Draw the
structure of the product.32.Two products are formed in the following [1,7] sigmatropic rearrangement,one due to hydrogen migration and the other to
deuterium migration. Show the configuration of the products by replacing A and B with the appropriate substituents (H or D).
33.a.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction. (
Hint:An electrocyclic reaction is followed by a Diels
ÐAlder reaction.)b.What would be the reaction product if 
trans
-2-butene were used instead of ethene?
34.Explain why two different products are formed from disrotatory ring closure of (2
E,4Z,6Z)-octatriene,but only one product is
formed from disrotatory ring closure of (2E,4Z,6E)-octatriene.35.Give the product of each of the following sigmatropic rearrangements:
a.c.
b.d.
36.cis-3,4-Dimethylcyclobutene undergoes thermal ring opening to form the two products shown. One of the products is formed in
99% yield,the other in 1% yield. Which is which?
CH3CH3CHCHCHCH
CH2O[5,5] sigmatropicrearrangementCH3CHCHCH
2O[3,3] sigmatropicrearrangementCH3CH2CHCHCH
CH2O[5,5] sigmatropicrearrangementCH2CHCHCH
3O[3,3] sigmatropicrearrangementCH2CH2HDBDACH3BHAOHCH3OHCH31715 cm1HCH3CH2CH3H3CHCH3CCH3H3CCH3H3CHHBRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 128
Problems12937.If isomer A is heated to about 100 
¡C,a mixture of isomers A and B is formed. Explain why there is no trace of isomer C or D.
38.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
39.Compound A will not undergo a ring-opening reaction under thermal conditions,but compound B will. Explain.
40.Professor Perry C. Click found that heating any one of the following isomers resulted in scrambling of the deuterium to all 
threepositions on the five-membered ring. Propose a mechanism to account for this observation.
41.How could the following transformation be carried out,using only heat or light?
42.Show the steps involved in the following reaction:
43.Propose a mechanism for the following reaction:
HH+OHCO2CH3OOCCCO2CH3CO2CH3CO2CH3CO2HHHHDDDHHH
HABCH3OH3CCH3OHH3CCD3C6H5C6H5CH3CD3CH3C6H5100 OCCD3CH3C6H5C6H5C6H5CD3CH3C6H5C6H5ABCD
BRUI29-101_129r2  06-03-2003  2:50 PM  Page 129
Librium ValiumAtivan Adrugis anyab-
sorbed substance
that changes or en-hances a physical or psycho-

logical function in the body. A

drug can be a gas,a liquid,or a

solid and can have a simple structure or a complicated one. Drugs have been used by

humans for thousands of years to alleviate pain and illness. By trial and error,people

learned which herbs,berries,roots,and bark could be used for medicinal purposes.

The knowledge about natural medicines was passed down from generation to genera-

tion without any understanding of how the drugs actually worked. Those who dis-

pensed the drugsÑmedicine men,shamans,and witch doctorsÑwere important

members of every civilization. However,the drugs available to them were just a small

fraction of the drugs available to us today.
Even at the beginning of the twentieth century,there were no drugs for the dozens of
functional,degenerative,neurological,and psychiatric disorders; no hormone thera-

pies; no vitamins; andÑmost significantlyÑno effective drug for the cure of any in-

fectious disease. Local anesthetics had just been discovered,and there were only two

analgesics to relieve major pain. One reason that families had many children was

because some of the children were bound to succumb to childhood diseases. Life spans

were generally short. In 1900,for example,the average life expectancy in the United

States was 46 years for a man and 48 years for a woman. In 1920,about 80 of every

100,000 children died before their fifteenth birthday,most as a result of infections in

their first year of life. Now there is a drug for treating almost every disease,and this is

reflected by current life expectancies:74 years for a man and 79 years for a woman.

Now only about four of every 100,000 children die before the age of 15Ñmainly from

cancer,accidents,and inherited diseases.
The shelves of a typical modern pharmacy are stocked with almost 2000 prepara-
tions,most of which contain a single active ingredient,usually an organic compound.

These medicines can be swallowed,injected,inhaled,or absorbed through the skin. In

2001,more than 3.1 billion prescriptions were dispensed in the United States. The most

widely prescribed drugs
are listed in Table30.1in order of the number of prescriptions
120430The Organic Chemistry of DrugsDiscovery and DesignBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1204
Introduction1205Proprietary nameGeneric nameStructureUse
HydrocodoneHydrocodoneAnalgesic
with APAPwith APAP
AtorvastatinStatin
(cholesterol-reducing drug)ConjugatedHormone replacement therapy
estrogensLevothyroxineTreatment of
hypothyroidismAzithromycinAntibiotic
ClOCOOHH2NSO2NHCH2DiureticFurosimideLasixZithromax¨Synthroid¨Premarin¨Lipitor¨Table 30.1The Most Widely Prescribed Drugs in the United States
OHOCH3CNHNCH3CH3OOO(CH3)2CHOHOH
OFHOCOCNHNH3COHOOCH2CHCH2NHCH(CH3)2H2NCCH2TenorminAtenolol-adrenergicblocking agent
(antiarrhythmic,
antihypertensive)OOHHOOCH
2CHCONaIIIINH2ONOOH3CCH
3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3CH2H3CH3CH3CCH3OHOHONOOHOHOHOCH3OOBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1205
1206CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsProprietary nameGeneric nameStructureUse
AmoxicillinAntibiotic
AmlodipineCalcium channel blocker
(antihypertensive)
AlprazolamTranquilizer
AlbuterolBronchodilator
LoratadineAntihistamine
OmeprazoleTreatment of
stomach acid reflux
OCH3OSCH2OCH3H3CNNNHCH3Prilosec¨HSClNNHH2NSO2OODiureticHydrochlorothiazide(HCTZ)HydrodiurilOCOCH2CH3ClNNClaritin¨CHCH2NHCCH3HOOHCH3CH3HOCH2Albuterol¨ClNNNNH3CXanax¨COCH2CH3H2NCH2CH2OCH2OH3CClCH3OCHNONorvasc¨OONH2COOHHOCHCNH
HSHNCH3CH3Trimox¨Table 30.1(continued)
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1206
Section 30.1Naming Drugs
1207written. Antibiotics are the most widely prescribed class of drugs in the world. In the
developed world,heart drugs are the most widely prescribed class,partly because they

are generally taken for the remainder of the patient
Õs life. In recent years,prescriptions
for psychotropic drugs have decreased as doctors have become more aware of problems

associated with addiction,and prescriptions for asthma have increased,reflecting a

greater incidence (or awareness) of the disease. The U.S. market accounts for 50% of

pharmaceutical sales. The aging U.S. population (by 2005,nearly 30% will be over 50

years old) will lead to increased demand for treating conditions such as high cholesterol

levels,hypertension,diabetes,osteoarthritis,and menopause symptoms.
Throughout this book we have encountered many drugs,vitamins,and hormones,
and in many cases we have discussed the mechanism by which each compound

produces its physiological effect. Table30.2lists some of these compounds,their uses,

and where in the text they are discussed. Now we will take a look at how drugs are

discovered and how they are named,and we will examine some of the techniques

currently used by scientists in their search for new drugs.
Drug, hormone, or vitaminRemarkSection or chapter
Sulfa drugsThe first antibioticsSection25.8
TetracyclineBroad-spectrum antibioticSection5.8

PuromycinBroad-spectrum antibioticSection27.13

NonactinIonophorous antibioticSection12.9

PenicillinAntibioticSections17.4and 17.16

GentamicinAntibioticSection22.19

Gramicidin SAntibioticSection23.8

AspirinAnalgesic,anti-inflammatory agentSections19.9and 26.5

EnkephalinsPainkillersSection23.8

Diethyl etherAnestheticSection12.6

Sodium pentothalSedative hypnoticSection12.6

5-fluorouracilAnticancer agentSection25.8

MethotrexateAnticancer agentSection25.8
Anticancer agentSection18.12
ThalidomideSedative with teratogenic side effectsSection5.15

AZT*Anti-AIDS agentSection27.17

WarfarinAnticoagulantSection25.9

EpinephrineVasoconstrictor,bronchodilatorSection10.11

Vitamins
Chapter25,Sections9.8,
18.11,21.11,22.19,26.4,

and 26.7HormonesSections23.8and 26.9
Ð26.11*-Azido--deoxythymidine
23Taxol¨Table 30.2Drugs, Hormones, and Vitamins Discussed in Earlier Chapters
30.1Naming DrugsThe most accurate names of drugs are the chemical names that define their structures.
However,these names are too long and complicated to appeal to physicians or the

general public. The pharmaceutical company is allowed to choose the proprietary

name for a drug it develops. A 
proprietary name (trade name
or brand name)iden-tifies a commercial product and distinguishes it from other products. A proprietary

name can be used only by the owner of the registered 
trademark,which can be a
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1207
Foxglove1208CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of Drugsname,a symbol,or a picture. It is in the best interest of the company to choose a name
that is easy to remember and pronounce so that when the patent expires,the public will

continue to request the drug by its proprietary name.Each drug is also given a 
generic namethat any pharmaceutical company can use
to identify the product. The pharmaceutical company that develops a drug is allowed

to choose the generic name from a list of 10 names provided by an independent group.

It is in the best interest of the company to choose the generic name that is hardest to

pronounce and the least likely to be remembered,so that physicians and consumers

will continue to use the familiar proprietary name. Proprietary names must always be

capitalized,whereas generic names are not capitalized.
Drug manufacturers are permitted to patent and retain exclusive rights to the drugs
they develop. A patent is valid for 20 years. Once the patent expires,other drug com-

panies can market the drug under the generic name or under their own brand name,

which is called a branded generic name. For example,the antibiotic ampicillin is sold

as Penbritin¨by the company that held the original patent. Now that the patent has ex-
pired,the drug is sold by other companies as Ampicin,Ampilar,Amplital,Binotal,

Nuvapen,Pentrex,Ultrabion,Viccillin,and 30 other branded generic names.
The over-the-counter drugs that line the shelves of drugstores are available without
prescription. They are often mixtures containing one or more active ingredients

(generic or proprietary drugs),plus sweeteners and inert fillers. For example,the

preparations called (Whitehall Laboratories),(Upjohn),and 

(Bristol-Meyers Squibb) all contain ibuprofen,a mild analgesic and anti-inflammato-

ry drug. Ibuprofen was patented in Britain in 1964 by Boots,Inc.,and the U.S. Food

and Drug Administration (FDA) approved its use as a nonprescription drug in 1984.
30.2Lead CompoundsThe goal of the medicinal chemist is to find compounds that have potent effects on given
diseases,with minimum side effects. In other words,a drug must react selectively with

its target and have minimal negative effects. A drug must get to the right place in the

body,at the right concentration,and at the right time. Therefore,a drug must have the ap-

propriate solubility to allow it to be transported to the target cell. If it is taken orally,the

drug must be insensitive to the acid conditions of the stomach,and it also must resist en-

zymatic degradation by the liver before it reaches its target. Finally,it must eventually be

either excreted as is or degraded to harmless compounds that can be excreted.
Medicinal agents used by humans since ancient times provided the starting point for
the development of our current arsenal of drugs. The active ingredients were isolated

from the herbs,berries,roots,and bark used in traditional medicine. Foxglove,for in-

stance,furnished digitoxin,a cardiac stimulant. The bark of the cinchona tree yielded

quinine for relief from malaria. Willow bark contains salicylates used to control fever

and pain. The sticky juice of the oriental opium poppy provided morphine for severe

pain and codeine for the control of cough. By 1882,more than 50 different herbs were

commonly used to make medicines. Many of these herbs were grown in the gardens of

religious establishments used to treat the sick.Scientists still search the world for plants and berries and the oceans for flora and
fauna that might yield new medicinal compounds. a compound isolated from

the bark of the Pacific yew tree,is a relatively recently recognized anticancer agent

(Section18.12).
Once a naturally occurring drug is isolated and its structure determined,it can serve as
a prototype in a search for other biologically active compounds. The prototype is called a

lead compound(i.e.,a compound that plays a leading role in the search). Analogs of the
lead compound are synthesized in order to find one that might have improved therapeutic

properties or fewer side effects. The analog may have a different substituent than the lead

compound,a branched chain instead of a straight chain,or a different ring system.

Changing the structure of the lead compound is called molecular modification
.Taxol¨,Nuprin¨Motrin¨Advil¨BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1208
Coca leavesSection 30.3Molecular Modification
120930.3Molecular ModificationA classic example of molecular modification is the development of synthetic local
anesthetics from cocaine. Cocaine comes from the leaves of 
Erythroxylon coca
,a bush
native to the highlands of the South American Andes. Cocaine is a highly effective

local anesthetic,but it produces disturbing effects on the central nervous system

(CNS),ranging from initial euphoria to severe depression. By dissecting the cocaine

molecule step by step
Ñremoving the methoxycarbonyl group and cleaving the seven-
membered-ring systemÑscientists identified the portion of the molecule that carries
the local anesthetic activity without the damaging CNS effects. This knowledge gave

an improved lead compound
Ñan ester of benzoic acid,with the alcohol component of
the ester having a terminal tertiary amino group.
Hundreds of esters were then synthesized,resulting in esters with substituents on
the aromatic ring,esters with the alkyl groups bonded to the nitrogen,and esters with

the length of the connecting alkyl chain modified. Successful anesthetics obtained

through molecular modification were benzocaine,a topical anesthetic,and procaine,

commonly known by the trade name Novocain
¨.Because the ester group of procaine is hydrolyzed relatively rapidly by serum ester-
ases (enzymes that catalyze ester hydrolysis),procaine has a short half-life. Therefore,

compounds with less easily hydrolyzed amide groups were synthesized (Section17.6).

In this way,lidocaine,one of the most widely used injectable anesthetics,was discov-

ered. The rate at which lidocaine is hydrolyzed is further decreased by its two 
ortho-methyl substituents,which provide steric hindrance to the vulnerable carbonyl group.
Later,physicians recognized that the action of an anesthetic administered in vivo
(in a living organism) could be lengthened considerably if it were administered along

with epinephrine. Because epinephrine is a vasoconstrictor,it reduces the blood sup-

ply,allowing the drug to remain at its targeted site for a longer period.
In screening the structurally modified compounds for biological activity,scientists
were surprised to find that replacing the ester linkage of procaine with an amide link-

age led to a compound
Ñprocainamide hydrochlorideÑthat had activity as a cardiac
depressant as well as activity as a local anesthetic. Procainamide hydrochloride is cur-

rently used clinically as an antiarrhythmic.HNNH2OCCH3CH2CH3CH2ClNHprocainamide hydrochlorideNH3CH3CH3Cimproved lead compoundcocainelead compoundCOOCH3OONCOOCOONH2OCNH2OCprocaineNovocainNCH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2CH3CH2NHCH3CH3OlidocaineXylocaineCNBenzocaineBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1209
1210CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsMorphine,the most widely used analgesic for severe pain,is the standard by
which other painkilling medications are measured. Although scientists have learned

how to synthesize morphine,all commercial morphine is obtained from opium,the

juice from a species of poppy. Morphine occurs in opium to the extent of 10%.

Methylating one of the OH groups of morphine produces codeine,which has one-

tenth the analgesic activity of morphine. Codeine profoundly inhibits the cough re-

flex. Although 3% of opium is codeine,most commercial codeine is obtained by

methylating morphine. Esterifying one of the OH groups of morphine produces a

compound with a similar reduced potency. Acetylating both OH groups forms heroin,

which is much more potent than morphine. Heroin is less polar than morphine,so it

crosses the bloodÐbrain barrier more rapidly,resulting in a more rapid 
Òhigh.ÓHero-in has been banned in most countries because it is widely abused. It is synthesized by

using acetic anhydride to acetylate morphine. Therefore,both heroin and acetic acid

are formed as products. Drug enforcement agencies use dogs trained to recognize the

pungent odor of acetic acid.Molecular modification of codeine led to dextromethorphan,the active ingredi-
ent in most cough medicines. Etorphine was synthesized when scientists realized

that analgesic potency was related to the drug
Õs ability to bind hydrophobically to
the opiate receptor (Section30.6). Etorphine is about 2000 times more potent than

morphine,but it is not safe for use by humans. It has been used to tranquilize

elephants and other large animals. Pentazocine is useful in obstetrics because it

dulls the pain of labor,but does not depress the respiration of the infant as

morphine does.Methadone was synthesized by German scientists in 1944 in an attempt to find a
drug to treat muscle spasms. (It was originally called 
ÒAdolphileÓin honor of Adolph
Hitler.) It was not recognized until 10 years later
Ñafter building molecular models
Ñthat methadone and morphine have similar shapes. In contrast to morphine,

methadone can be administered orally. Methadone has a considerably longer half-life

(24Ð26 hours) than morphine (2Ð4 hours). Cumulative effects are seen with repeated
doses of methadone,so lower doses and longer intervals between doses are possible.

Consequently,methadone is used to treat chronic pain and the withdrawal symptoms

of heroin addicts. Reducing the carbonyl group of methadone and acetylating it forms
-acetylmethadol. The levo isomer of this compound can suppress withdrawal
aNCH3OHHOHHHHOONCH3CH3OONCH3CH3COOOOCCH3Omorphinecodeineheroin
NCH3CH3ONCH3OCH3HOONCH2CHHOCH3CH3CCH2CH2CH3OHCCH3CH3CH3dextromethorphanetorphinepentazocine
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1210
Section 30.4Random Screening
1211Paul Ehrlich (1854Ð1915)
was aGerman bacteriologist. He received a

medical degree from the University of

Leipzig and was a professor at the

University of Berlin. In 1892,he

developed an effective diphtheria

antitoxin. For his work on immunity,

he received the 1908 Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine,together with

Ilya Ilich Mechnikov.
symptoms for 72 hours (Section5.13). When (isomethadone) was
introduced,it was initially thought to be the long-sought-after nonaddicting painkiller.

However,it was later found to have no therapeutic advantage over less toxic and more

effective analgesics.
Notice that morphine and all the compounds prepared by molecular modification of
morphine have a structural feature in common
Ñan aromatic ring attached to a quater-
nary carbon that is attached to a tertiary amine two carbons away.
30.4Random Screening
The lead compound for the development of most drugs is found by screening
thousands of compounds randomly. A 
random screen
,also known as a 
blind screen
,is a search for a pharmacologically active compound without having any information

about which chemical structures might show activity. The first blind screen was car-

ried out by Paul Ehrlich,who was searching for a 
Òmagic bullet
Óagainst try-panosomesÑthe microorganisms that cause African sleeping sickness. After testing
more than 900 compounds against trypanosomes,Ehrlich tested some of his com-

pounds against other bacteria. Compound 606 (salvarsan) was found to be dramatical-

ly effective against the microorganisms (spirochetes) that cause syphilis.
An important part of random screening is recognizing an effective compound. This
requires the development of an assay for the desired biological activity. Some assays

can be done in vitro (in glass)
Ñfor example,searching for a compound that will inhibit
a particular enzyme. Others are done in vivo
Ñfor instance,searching for a compound
that will save a mouse from a lethal dose of a virus. One problem with in vivo assays is

that drugs can be metabolized differently by different animals. Thus,an effective drug

in a mouse may be less effective or even useless in a human. Another problem involves

regulating the dosages of both the virus and the drug. If the dosage of the virus is too

high,it might kill the mouse in spite of the presence of a biologically active compound

that could save the animal. If the dosage of the potential drug is too high,the drug might

kill the mouse whereas a lower dosage would have saved it.
The observation that azo dyes effectively dyed wool fibers (animal protein) gave
scientists the idea that such dyes might selectively bind to bacterial proteins,too. Well
CCCCCCCNDarvon¨NCH
CH2C
CCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3OmethadoneNCH
CH2C
COCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3CH3CO-acetylmethadolNCHCH2CCCH3CH3CH3CH2CH3OisomethadoneDarvonIlya Ilich Mechnikov (1845Ð1916)
,later known as Eli” Metchnikoff,was

born in the Ukraine. He was the first

scientist to recognize that white blood

cells were important in resistance to

infection. Metchnikoff succeeded

Pasteur as director of the Pasteur

Institute.
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1211
1212CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsGram-negative bacteria have an outermembrane that covers their cell walls;
gram-positive bacteria do not have an
outer membrane, but tend to have
thicker and more rigid cell walls. The

two can be distinguished by a stain,
invented by Hans Christian Gram, that
turns gram-negative bacteria pink and

gram-positive bacteria purple.over 10,000 dyes were screened in vitro in antibacterial tests,but none showed any
antibiotic activity. Some scientists argued that the dyes should be screened in vivo

because what physicians really needed were antibacterial agents that would cure

infections in humans and animals,not in test tubes.
In vivo studies were done in mice that had been infected with a bacterial culture.
Now the luck of the investigators improved. Several dyes turned out to counteract

gram-positive infections. The least toxic of these,Prontosil (a bright red dye),became

the first drug to treat bacterial infections.
The fact that Prontosil was inactive in vitro but active in vivo should have suggested
that the dye was converted to an active compound by the mammalian organism,but this

did not occur to the bacteriologists,who were content to have found a useful antibiotic.

When scientists at the Pasteur Institute later investigated Prontosil,they noted that mice

given the drug did not excrete a red compound. Urine analysis showed that the mice

excreted 
para
-acetamidobenzenesulfonamide,a colorless compound. Chemists knew
that anilines are acetylated in vivo,so they prepared the nonacetylated compound

(sulfanilamide). When sulfanilamide was tested in mice infected with streptococcus,all

the mice were cured,whereas untreated control mice died. Sulfanilamide was the first

of the sulfa drugs.
We have seen that sulfanilamide acts by inhibiting the bacterial enzyme that incor-
porates para
-aminobenzoic acid into folic acid (Section25.8). Thus,sulfanilamide is a
bacteriostaticdrug,not a 
bactericidaldrug. A bacteriostatic druginhibits the furthergrowth of bacteria,whereas a 
bactericidal drugkills the bacteria. Sulfanilamide in-
hibits the enzyme because the sulfonamide and carboxylic acid groups have similar

sizes. Many successful drugs have been designed by using similar isosteric (like-size)

replacements (Sections25.8and 25.9).
30.5Serendipity in Drug Development
Many drugs have been discovered accidentally. Nitroglycerin,the drug used to relieve
the symptoms of angina pectoris (heart pain),was discovered when workers handling

nitroglycerin in the explosives industry experienced severe headaches. Investigation

revealed that the headaches were caused by nitroglycerin
Õs ability to produce a marked
dilation of blood vessels. The pain associated with an angina attack results from the in-

ability of the blood vessels to supply the heart adequately with blood. Nitroglycerin re-

lieves the pain by dilating cardiac blood vessels.
The tranquilizer is another drug that was discovered accidentally. Leo
Sternbach synthesized a series of quinazoline 3-oxides,but none of them showed 

any pharmacological activity. One of the compounds was not submitted for testing
Librium¨ONO2CH2ONO2CHONO2CH2nitroglycerinNHSO
2NH2H2Npara-aminobenzenesulfonamidesulfanilamideCH3CSO
2NH2Opara-acetamidobenzenesulfonamideNH2H2NNNSO
2NH2ProntosilGerhard Domagk (1895Ð1964)was a research scientist at I. G.

Farbenindustrie,a German

manufacturer of dyes and other

chemicals. He carried out studies

that showed Prontosil to be an

effective antibacterial agent. His

daughter,who was dying of a

streptococcal infection as a result of

cutting her finger,was the first

patient to receive the drug and be

cured by it (1935). Prontosil received

wider fame when it was used to save
the life of Franklin D. Roosevelt,Jr.,

son of the U.S. president. Domagk

received the Nobel Prize in

physiology or medicine in 1939,but

Hitler did not allow Germans to
accept Nobel Prizes because Carl
von Ossietsky,a German who was in

a concentration camp,had been

awarded the Nobel Prize for peace in

1935. Domagk was eventually able to

accept the prize in 1947.BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1212
because it was not the quinazoline 3-oxide he had set out to synthesize. Two years
after the project was abandoned,a laboratory worker came across this compound

while cleaning up the lab,and Sternbach decided that he might as well submit it for

testing before it was thrown away. The compound was shown to have tranquilizing

properties and,when its structure was investigated,was found be a benzodiazepine

4-oxide. Methylamine,instead of displacing the chloro substituent to form a different

quinazoline 3-oxide,had added to the imine group of the six-membered ring,causing

the ring to open and reclose to a seven-membered ring. The compound was given the

trade name Librium¨when it was put into clinical use in 1960.
Librium¨was structurally modified in an attempt to find other tranquilizers. One
successful modification produced Valium
¨,a tranquilizer almost 10 times more potent
than Librium¨. Currently,there are eight benzodiazepines in clinical use as tranquilizers
in the United States and some 15 others abroad. Xanax¨is one of the most widely
prescribed medications; Rohypnol¨is one of the so-called date-rape drugs.Section 30.5Serendipity in Drug Development
1213Na quinazoline3-oxidea benzodiazepine 4-oxidechlordiazepoxideLibrium (1960)CH2ClHNCH2ClNHCH3NNCH2ClNHCH3OHNCH2NHCH3CH3NH2CH3NH2ClClClClClNNNHCH3ONONONOan additionreaction occurreda substitution reactiondid not occurO2NClClNNOCH3NNFFOCH2CH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3O2NHNHNNClOClNClOHONNNNH3CflunitrazepamRohypnol (1963)ClNNOCH3diazepamValium (1963)flurazepamDalmane (1970)clonazepamKlonopin (1975)lorazepamAtivan (1977)alprazolamXanax (1970)Leo H. Sternbach
was born inAustria in 1908. In 1918,after World

War I and the dissolution of the

Austro-Hungarian Empire,

SternbachÕs father moved to Krakow

in the re-created Poland and obtained

a concession to open a pharmacy. As

a pharmacistÕs son,Sternbach was

accepted at the Jagiellonian

University School of Pharmacy,

where he received both a masterÕs

degree in pharmacy and a Ph.D. in

chemistry. With discrimination

against Jewish scientists growing in

Eastern Europe in 1937,Sternbach

moved to Switzerland to work with

Ruika (p.000) at the ETH 

(the Swiss Federal Institute of

Technology). In 1941,HoffmannÐ

LaRoche brought Sternbach and

several other scientists out of Europe.

Sternbach became a research chemist

at LaRocheÕs U.S. headquarters in

Nutley,New Jersey,where he later

became director of medicinal

chemistry.
czX-RefBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1213
1214CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of Drugs30.6ReceptorsMany drugs exert their physiological effects by binding to a specific cellular
binding site called a receptor
. That is why a small amount of a drug can bring about
a measurable effect. Drug receptors are often glycoproteins or lipoproteins,which

explains why different enantiomers of a drug have different effects (Section5.15).

Some receptors are part of cell membranes,while others are found in the

cytoplasm
Ñthe material outside the nucleus. Because not all cells have the same re-
ceptors,drugs have considerable specificity. For example,epinephrine has intense

effects on cardiac muscle,but almost no effect on muscle in other parts of the body.

Nucleic acidsÑparticularly DNA
Ñalso act as receptors for certain kinds of drugs.A drug interacts with its receptor by means of the same kinds of bonding
interactionsÑhydrogen bonding,electrostatic attractions,and van der Waals inter-
actionsÑthat we encountered in other examples of molecular recognition
(Section24.8). The most important factor in bringing together a drug and a recep-

tor is a snug fit:The greater the affinity of a drug for its binding site,the higher is

the drugÕs potential biological activity. Two drugs for which DNA is a receptor are
chloroquine (an antimalarial) and 3,6-diaminoacridine (an antibacterial). These flat

cyclic compounds can slide into the DNA double helix between base pairs
Ñlike a
card being inserted into a deck of playing cardsÑand interfere with the normalreplication of DNA.
Knowing something about the molecular basis of drug action
Ñsuch as how a drug
interacts with a receptorÑallows scientists to design and synthesize compounds that
might have a desired biological activity. For example,when excess histamine is pro-

duced by the body,it causes the symptoms associated with the common cold and

allergic responses. This is thought to be the result of the protonated ethylamino group

anchoring the histamine molecule to a negatively charged portion of the histamine

receptor.
histamineNNHCH2CH2NH3histaminereceptorHNCHCH2CH2CH2NCH2CH3CH2CH3ClNchloroquineH2NNH
2N3,6-diaminoacridineBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1214
Drugs that interfere with the natural action of histamine
Ñcalled antihistaminesÑbind to the histaminereceptor but do not trigger the same response as histamine.

Like histamine,these drugs have a protonated amino group that binds to the receptor.

The drugs also have bulky groups that keep the histamine molecule from approaching

the receptor.
Acetylcholine is a neurohormone that enhances peristalsis,wakefulness,and mem-
ory and is essential for nerve transmission. A deficiency of brain cell receptors that

bind acetylcholineÑcholinergic receptors
Ñcontributes to the characteristic loss of
memory in Alzheimer
Õs disease. Cholinergic receptors are structurally similar to those
that bind histamine. Therefore,antihistamines and cholinergic agents show overlap-

ping activities. As a result,the antihistamine diphenhydramine has been used to treat

insomnia and to combat motion sickness.Excess histamine production by the body also causes the hypersecretion of stomach
acid by the cells of the stomach lining,leading to the development of ulcers. The anti-

histamines that block the histamine receptors
Ñthereby preventing the allergic re-
sponses associated with excess histamine production
Ñhave no effect on HCl
production. This fact led scientists to conclude that a second kind of histamine recep-

tor triggers the release of acid into the stomach.Because 4-methylhistamine was found to cause weak inhibition of HCl secretion,it
was used as a lead compound. About 500 molecular modifications were performed

over a 10-year period before four clinically useful antiulcer agents were found. Two of

these are and Notice that steric blocking of the receptor site is not

a factor in these compounds. Compared with the antihistamines,the effective antiulcer

drugs have more polar rings and longer side chains.
Zantac¨.Tagamet¨CH3COCH2CH2N(CH3)3OacetylcholinecholinergicreceptorSection 30.6Receptors
12153-D Molecules:Histamine;
Diphenhydramine;
Promethazine;
PromazineCHOCH2CH2NH(CH3)2NCH2CHNH(CH3)2SCH3NCH2CH2CH2NH(CH3)2SantihistaminesdiphenhydramineBenadrylpromethazineProminepromazineTalofenBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1215
1216CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of Drugshas the same imidazole ring as 4-methylhistidine,but it has a sulfur atom
and a functional group based on guanidine (Section23.1). has a different het-

erocyclic ring,and although its side chain is similar to that of it does not

contain a guanidino group.Observationsthat serotonin was implicated in the generation of migraine attacks
led to the development of drugs that bind to serotonin receptors. Sumatriptan,intro-

duced in 1991,relieved not only the pain associated with migraines,but also many of

migraineÕs other symptoms,including sensitivity to light and sound and nausea.
The success of sumatriptan spurred a search for other antimigraine agents by molecularmodification,and three new triptans were introduced in 1997 and 1998. These 

second-generation triptans showed some improvements over sumatriptan
Ñspecifically,
a longer half-life,reduced cardiac side effects,and improved CNS penetration.
In screening modified compounds,it is not unusual to find a compound with a com-
pletely different pharmacological activity than the lead compound. For example,a

molecular modification of a sulfonamide,an antibiotic,led to tolbutamide,a drug with

hypoglycemic activity (Section25.8).
a sulfonamideSH2NNHR
OOSOOH3CNHNHCH
2CH2CH2CH3COtolbutamideHOHNCH2CH2NH2serotoninHNCH2CH2NCH3CH3sumatriptanImitrexSCH3NHOOTagamet¨,Zantac¨Tagamet¨Tutorial:
Structural similarities in classes
of drugsNHCH3CH2SCH2CH2NHNHCH3NNHCH2CH2NH3NO2CH3CNCCHHNCOCH3NHCH2CH34-methylhistaminecimetidineTagametranitidineZantacNNHCH2SCH2CH2NHCH3OOHNHNCH2CH2NCH3CH3zolmitriptanZomigHNNCH3naratriptanAmergeHNNNCH2CH2NCH3CH3rizatriptanMaxaltNSCH3NHOOBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1216
Section 30.7Drugs as Enzyme Inhibitors
1217Molecular modification of promethazine,an antihistamine,led to chlorpromazine,
a drug that,although lacking antihistamine activity,lowered the body temperature.

This drug found clinical use in chest surgery,where patients previously had to be

cooled down by wrapping them in cold,wet sheets. Because wrapping in cold,wet

sheets had been an old method of calming psychotic patients,a French psychiatrist

tried the drug on some of his patients. He found that chlorpromazine was able to sup-

press psychotic symptoms to the point that the patients assumed almost normal behav-

ioral characteristics. However,they soon developed uncoordinated involuntary

movements. After thousands of molecular modifications,thioridazine was found to

have the appropriate calming effect with less problematic side effects. It is now in clin-

ical use as an antipsychotic.Sometimes a drug initially developed for one purpose is later found to have proper-
ties that make it a better drug for a different purpose. Beta-blockers were originally in-

tended to be used to alleviate the pain associated with angina by reducing the amount

of work done by the heart. Later,they were found to have antihypertensive properties,

so now they are used primarily to manage hypertension,a disease that is prevalent in

the Western world.
30.7Drugs as Enzyme InhibitorsIn earlier chapters,we discussed several drugs that act by inhibiting enzymes
(Sections25.8and 25.9). Penicillin,for example,destroys bacteria by inhibiting the

enzyme that synthesizes bacterial cell walls (Section17.15).
Bacteria develop resistance to penicillin by secreting penicillinase,an enzyme that
destroys penicillin by hydrolyzing its -lactam ring before the drug can interfere with

bacterial cell wall synthesis.
bactiveenzymeinactiveenzymeCOHCOOHCRCNHOCOOCOHCRCNHOpenicillinSNHCH3CH3COOSNCH3CH3NCH2CH2CH2N(CH3)2SClSCH3CH3NCH2CH2NSchlorpromazineThorazinethioridazineMellarilCCH2OHNHCCH
OOCCH2ONHNHCHCH
H2OOCCH2OHCHCH
Openicillinpenicillinasepenicillinasepenicillinasepenicilloic acid
active druginactive hydrolysisproductBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1217
1218CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsChemists have developed drugs that inhibit penicillinase. If such a drug is given to
a patient along with penicillin,the antibiotic is not destroyed. This is an example of a

drug that has no therapeutic effect itself,but acts by protecting a therapeutic drug.
One penicillinase inhibitor is a sulfone,which is easily prepared from penicillin by
oxidizing the sulfur atom with a peroxyacid (Section20.4).
Because the sulfone looks like the original antibiotic,penicillinase accepts it as a
substrate,forming an ester,as it does with penicillin. If the ester were then hydrolyzed,

penicillinase would be liberated and,therefore,would be free to react with penicillin.

However,the electron-withdrawing sulfone provides an alternative pathway to hydroly-

sis that forms a stable imine. Because imines are susceptible to nucleophilic attack,an

amino group at the active site of penicillinase reacts with the imine,forming a second

covalent bond between the enzyme and the inhibitor. The covalently attacked group

inactivates penicillinase,thereby wiping out the resistance to penicillin. The sulfone is

another example of a mechanism-based 
suicide inhibitor(Section25.8).
What makes the sulfone such an effective inhibitor is that the reactive imine group
does not appear until after the sulfone has been bound to the enzyme that is to be inac-

tivated. In other words,the inhibitor has a specific target. In contrast,if an imine were
RCOOHCHCRCNHOOa sulfoneCHCRCNHOOpenicillinCOOSNCH3CH3COOSCH3CH3NOOOSCOONCH3CH3OCH2ONH2HCCCH2OHORCNHCH2Oester hydrolysisimine formationCH2OHHCCNHCH3CH3CSO2CH3CH3CSO2COOCHH2NOOONRCNHOOONHNHCH
COORCNHOORCNHORCNHCHCOCOOSO2CH3CH3CHCHNHCpenicillinasean esteran iminepenicillinaseinactivepenicillinasepenicillinase
COOSCH3CH3OOOOBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1218
Section 30.7Drugs as Enzyme Inhibitors
1219administered directly to the patient,it would be nonspecific,reacting with whatever
nucleophile it first encountered.
When two drugs are given simultaneously to a patient,their combined effect can be
additive,antagonistic,or synergistic. That is,the effect of two drugs used in combina-

tion can be equal to,less than,or greater than the sum of the effects obtained when the

drugs are administered individually. Administering penicillin and the sulfone in com-

bination results in drug synergism
:The sulfone inhibits the penicillinase,so peni-
cillin won
Õt be destroyed and will be able to inhibit the enzyme that synthesizes
bacterial cell walls.
Another reason to administer two drugs in combination is that if some bacteria are
resistant to one of them,the second drug will minimize the chance that the resistant

strain will proliferate. For example,two antimicrobial agents,isoniazid and rifampin,

are given in combination to treat tuberculosis.
Typically,it takes a bacterial strain 15 to 20 years to evolve resistance to antibi-
otics.The fluoroquinolones,the last class of antibiotics to be discovered until very

recently,were discovered more than 30 years ago,so 
drug resistance
has become anincreasingly important problem in medicinal chemistry. More and more bacteria have

become resistant to all antibioticsÑeven vancomycin,until recently the antibiotic of
last resort.The antibiotic activity of the fluoroquinolones results from their ability to inhibit
DNA gyrase,an enzyme required for transcription (Section27.10). Fortunately,the

bacterial and mammalian forms of the enzyme are sufficiently different that the

fluoroquinolones inhibit only the bacterial enzyme.There are many different fluoroquinolones. All have fluorine substituents,which
increase the lipophilicity of the drug,enabling it to penetrate into tissues and cells. If

either the carboxyl group or the double bond in the 4-pyridinone ring is removed,all

activity is lost. By changing the substituents on the piperazine ring,excretion of the

drug can be shifted from the liver to the kidney,which is useful to patients with

impaired liver function. The substituents on the piperazine ring also affect the half-

life of the drug.FciprofloxacinCiproactive against gram-negative bacteriaNNHNOCOOHsparfloxacinZagamactive against gram-negative bacteriaand gram-positive bacteriaNNHNCH3NH2H3COFFCOOHpiperazine ringpyridinone ringONHNH2NCH3OOOHOHOOHCH3CH3CH3HOCH3COOCH3OOHCHNHNNCH3NCH
3CH3CH3OisoniazidNydrazidrifampinRifadin3-D Molecules:Rifampin;
IsoniazidBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1219
1220CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsThe approval of by the FDA in April 2000 was met with great relief by the
medical community. is the first in a new family of antibiotics:the oxazolidi-

nones. In clinical trials,was found to cure 75% of the patients infected with

bacteria that had become resistant to all other antibiotics.is a synthetic compound designed by scientists to inhibit bacterial growth at
a point different from that at which any other antibiotic exerts its effect. inhibits

the initiation of protein synthesis by preventing the formation of the complex between

the first amino-acid-bearing tRNA,mRNA,and the 30S ribosome (Section27.13).

Because of the drugÕs new mode of activity,resistance is expected to be rare at first and,
hopefully,slow to emerge.
30.8Designing a Suicide SubstrateIt is important for a drug to have a minimum of undesirable side effects. A drug must
be administered in sufficient quantity to achieve a therapeutic effect; however,too

much of a drug can be lethal. The therapeutic index of a drug is the ratio of the lethal

dose to the therapeutic dose. The higher the 
therapeutic index,the greater is the mar-
gin of safety of the drug.Penicillin is an effective antibiotic that has a high therapeutic index because it in-
terferes with cell wall synthesis
Ñand bacterial cells have walls,but human cells do
not. What else is characteristic about cell walls that could lead to the design of an an-

tibiotic? We know that enzymes and other proteins are polymers of 
L-amino acids. Cellwalls,however,contain both 
L-amino acids and D-amino acids. Therefore,if the
racemization of naturally occurring L-amino acids to mixtures of L-and 
D-amino acidscould be prevented,
D-amino acids would not be available for incorporation into cell
walls,and bacterial cell wall synthesis could be stopped.
We have seen that amino acid racemization is catalyzed by an enzyme that requires
pyridoxal phosphate as a coenzyme (Section25.6). What we need,then,is a com-

pound that will inhibit this enzyme. Because the natural substrate for the enzyme is an

amino acid,an amino acid analog should be a good inhibitor.
The first step in racemization is removal of the -hydrogen of the amino acid. If the
inhibitor has a leaving group on the -carbon,the electrons left behind when the pro-

ton is removed can displace the leaving group instead of being delocalized into the

pyridine ring. (Compare the mechanism shown here with that shown for racemization

in Section25.6.) Transimination with the enzyme forms an -unsaturated amino

acid that reacts irreversibly with the imine formed by the enzyme and the coenzyme.

Because the enzyme is now bound to the coenzyme in an amine linkage rather than in

an imine linkage,the enzyme can no longer undergo a transimination reaction with its

amino acid substrate. The enzyme has thus been irreversibly inactivated. This is an-

other example of an inhibitor that does not become chemically active until it is at the

active site of the targeted enzyme.
a,bbaZyvox¨Zyvox¨OOOCH3CNHCH2ONFNHlinezolidZyvoxZyvox¨Zyvox¨Zyvox¨BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1220
Section 30.9Quantitative StructureÐActivity Relationships (QSAR)
122130.9Quantitative StructureÐActivity
Relationships (QSAR)The enormous cost involved in synthesizing and testing thousands of modified com-
pounds in an attempt to find an active drug led scientists to develop a more rational

approachÑcalled rational drug design
Ñto the design of biologically active mole-
cules. They realized that if a physical or chemical property of a series of compounds

could be correlated with biological activity,they would know what property of the

drug was related to that particular activity. Armed with this knowledge,scientists

could design compounds that would have a good chance of exhibiting the desired

activity. This strategy would be a great improvement over the random approach to

molecular modification that traditionally had been employed.
The first hint that a physical property of a drug could be related to biological activ-
ity appeared almost 100 years ago when scientists recognized that chloroformdiethyl ether,cyclopropane,and nitrous oxide were all useful general
anesthetics. Clearly,the chemical structures of these diverse compounds could not ac-

count for their similar pharmacological effects. Instead,some physical property must

explain the similarity of their biological activities.
In the early 1960s,Corwin Hansch postulated that the 
biological activity
of a drugdepended on two processes. The first is 
distribution
:A drug must be able to get from
the point where it enters the body to the receptor where it exerts its effect. For exam-

ple,an anesthetic must be able to cross the aqueous milieu (blood) and penetrate the

lipid barrier of nerve cell membranes. The second process is 
binding:When a drug
reaches its receptor,it must interact properly with it.
Chloroform,diethyl ether,cyclopropane,and nitrous oxide were each put into 
a mixture of 1-octanol and water. 1-Octanol was chosen as the nonpolar solvent because,
(N2O)(CHCl3),Corwin H. Hanschwas born inNorth Dakota in 1918. He received a

B.S. from the University of Illinois

and a Ph.D. from New York

University. He has been a professor

of chemistry at Pomona College 

since 1946.transiminationwith E(CH2)4NH2ENHHCHO(CH2)4NHNHNHNECHCH2HO(CH2)4NHHCNOCOOOOCH
2RPCCH2OOCCCH2ONH2HCNOCCClCH
2OBHClHBCCOONH2HOHOinactivated enzymean eliminationreactionan -unsaturatedamino acidan aminelinkageCH3CH3CH3CH3RRRRBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1221
1222CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of Drugswith its long chain and polar head group,it is a good model of a biological membrane.
When the amount of drug dissolving in each of the layers was measured,it turned out

that they all had a similar 
distribution coefficient
(the ratio of the amount dissolving in
1-octanol to the amount dissolving in water). In other words,the distribution coefficient

could be related to biological activity. Compounds with lower distribution coefficients
Ñmore polar compounds
Ñcould not penetrate the nonpolar cell membrane; compounds
with greater distribution coefficients
Ñmore nonpolar compounds
Ñcould not cross the
aqueous phase. This meant that the distribution coefficient of a compound could be used

to determine whether a compound should be tested in vivo. The technique of relating a

property of a series of compounds to biological activity is known as a 
quantitative
structure
Ðactivity relationship (QSAR)
.Determining the physical property of a drug cannot take the place of in vivo testing
because how the drug will behave once it reaches a suitable receptor cannot be pre-

dicted by the distribution coefficient alone. Nevertheless,QSAR analysis provides a

way to lead chemists to structures with the greatest probability of having the desired

biological activity. In this way,molecular modification that would lead to compounds

without the desired activity can be avoided.
In the following example,QSAR was useful not only in determining the structure
of a potentially active drug but also in determining something about the structure of

the receptor site. A series of substituted 2,4-diaminopyrimidines,used as inhibitors of

dihydrofolate reductase (Section25.8),was investigated.
The potency of the inhibitors could be described by the equation
where and are substituent parameters.
Theparameter is a measure of the electron-donating or electron-withdrawing
ability of the substituents R and The negative coefficient of indicates that poten-

cy is increased by electron donation (Chapter17,Problem75). The fact that increasing

the basicity of the drug increases its potency suggests that the protonated drug is more

active than the nonprotonated drug.
The parameter is a measure of the hydrophobicity of the substituents. Potency
was found to be better related to when the value for the more hydrophobic of the

two substituents was used,rather than the sum of the values for both substituents.

This finding suggests that the receptor has a hydrophobic pocket that can accommo-

date one,but not both,substituents.
In a search for a new analgesic,the potency of the drug was found to be described
by the following equation,where 
HAindicates whether R is a hydrogen bond acceptor
and where Bis a steric factor:
Analysis indicated that the vinyl substituted compound should be prepared.
In a search for a drug to be used to treat leukemia,a QSAR analysis showed that the
antileukemic activity of a series of substituted triazines was related to the electron-
ORNCOOHpotency   4.45  0.73HA  6.5B  1.55(B)2ppppsR.spspotency0.80p7.34s8.14Na 2,4-diaminopyrimidineNNH2H2NRRTutorial:
Quantitative structureÐactivity relationship
(QSAR)BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1222
Figure 30.1
The antibiotic netropsin (turquoiseatoms) bound in the minor groove
of DNA.Section 30.11Combinatorial Organic Synthesis
1223donating ability of the substituent. When,however,another QSAR analysis showed
that the toxicity of these compounds was also related to the electron-donating ability

of the substituent,it was decided that it would be fruitless to continue synthesizing and

testing this class of compounds.In addition to solubility and substituent parameters,some of the properties that
have been correlated with biological activity are oxidation
Ðreduction potential,molec-
ular size,interatomic distance between functional groups,degree of ionization,and

configuration.
30.10Molecular ModelingBecause the shape of a molecule determines whether it will be recognized by a recep-tor and,therefore,whether it will exhibit biological activity,compounds with similar

biological activity often have similar structures. Because computers can draw molecu-

lar models of compounds on a video display and move them around to assume differ-

ent conformations,computer 
molecular modelingallows more rational drug design.
There are computer programs that allow chemists to scan existing collections of thou-

sands of compounds to find those with appropriate structural and conformational

properties.Any compound that shows promise can be drawn on a computer display,along with
the three-dimensional image of a receptor site. For example,the binding of netropsin,

an antibiotic with a wide range of antimicrobial activity,to the minor groove of DNA

is shown in Figure30.1.
The fit between the compound and the receptor may suggest modifications that can
be made to the compound that result in more favorable binding. In this way,the selec-

tion of compounds to be synthesized for the purpose of screening for biological activ-

ity can be more rational and will allow pharmacologically active compounds to be

discovered more rapidly. The technique will become more valuable as scientists learn

more about receptor sites.30.11Combinatorial Organic SynthesisThe need for large collections of compounds that can be screened for biological activ-
ity in the constant search for new drugs has led organic chemists to a synthetic strate-

gy that employs the concept of mass production. This strategy,called 
combinatorialorganic synthesis
,involves the synthesis of a large group of related compounds
Ñknown as a library
Ñby covalently connecting sets of building blocks of various struc-
tures. For example,if a compound can be synthesized by connecting three different

building blocks,and if each set of building blocks contains 10 interchangeable com-

pounds,then 1000 different compounds can be prepared. This ap-

proach clearly mimics nature,which uses amino acids and nucleic acids as building

blocks to synthesize an enormous number of different proteins and nucleic acids.
The first requirement in combinatorial synthesis is the availability of an assortment
of reactive small molecules to be used as building blocks. Because of the ready avail-

ability of amino acids,combinatorial synthesis made its first appearance in the cre-

ation of peptide libraries. Peptides,however,have limited use as therapeutic agents

because they generally cannot be taken orally and are rapidly metabolized. Currently,

organic chemists create libraries of small organic molecules for use in a combinatorial

approach for modifying lead compoundsor as a complement to rational drug design
.An example of the approach used in combinatorial synthesis is the creation of a li-
brary of benzodiazepines. These compounds can be thought of as originating from

three different sets of building blocks:a substituted 2-aminobenzophenone,an amino

acid,and an alkylating agent.
101010BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1223
1224CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsR3R3NH2NHCHC
OFPrPrR2R1OO1. piperidine, DMF1. base2.2. 5% acetic acid, DMFR2R1ONHNHR3R2R1OOHNNR4R4XR3R2R1NNR4R3R2R1ONNHH2OresinFigure 30.2
Combinatorial organic synthesis of benzodiazepines.The 2-aminobenzophenone is attached to a solid support in a manner that allows it
to be readily removed by acid hydrolysis (Figure30.2). The amino acid
ÑN-protectedand activated by being converted into an acyl fluoride
Ñis then added. After the amide
is formed,the protecting group is removed and the seven-membered ring is created as

a result of imine formation. A base is added to remove the amide hydrogen,forming a

nucleophile that reacts with the added alkylating agent. The final product is then re-

moved from the solid support.
In order to synthesize a library of these compounds,the solid support containing the
2-aminobenzophenone can be divided into several portions,and a different amino acid

can then be added to each portion.Each ring-closed product can also be divided into

several portions,and a different alkylating agent can be added to each portion. In this

way,many different benzodiazepines can be prepared. Note that while a  combinatorial

synthesis does not have to have one of the reactants anchored to a solid support,such a

support improves yields because none of the product is lost during the purification step.
Tutorial:
Combinatorial synthesisR1R3NNOR4R4Xa 2-aminobenzophenonean amino acidan alkylatingagentR2R1NH2OR2R3OH3N+Oa benzodiazepineBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1224
Section 30.13Economics of Drugs 
¥ Governmental Regulations122530.12Antiviral DrugsRelatively few clinically useful drugs have been developed for viral infections. This
slow progress is due to the nature of viruses and the way they replicate. Viruses are

smaller than bacteria. A virus consists of nucleic acid
Ñeither DNA or RNA
Ñsurrounded by a coat of protein. A virus penetrates a host cell or merely injects its nu-

cleic acid into the cell. In either case,the nucleic acid is transcribed and is integrated

into the host genome.Most antiviral drugs
are analogs of nucleosides,interfering with DNA or RNA
synthesis. In this way,they prevent the virus from replicating. For example,acyclovir,

the drug used against herpes viruses,has a three-dimensional shape similar to guanine.

Acyclovir can,therefore,fool the virus into incorporating it instead of guanine into the

virusÕs DNA. Once this happens,the DNA strand can no longer grow,because
acyclovir lacks a group. The terminated DNA binds to DNA polymerase and

inactivates it irreversibly (Section27.7).
Cytarabine,used for acute myelocytic leukemia,competes with cytosine for incor-
poration into viral DNA. Cytarabine contains an arabinose rather than a ribose

(Table22.1). The group in the -position prevents the bases in DNA from

stacking properly (Section27.7).
Ribarvirin is a broad-spectrum antiviral agent that inhibits viral mRNA synthesis
(Section27.10). A step in the metabolic pathway responsible for the synthesis of

guanosine triphosphate (GTP) converts inosine monophosphate (IMP) into xanthosine

monophosphate (XMP). Ribarvirin is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme that cat-

alyzes that step. Thus,ribarvirin interferes with the synthesis of GTP and,therefore,

with all nucleic acid synthesis.Idoxuridine is approved in the United States only for the topical treatment of ocular
infections,although it is used for herpes infections in other countries. Idoxuridine has

an iodo group in place of the methyl group of thymine. The drug is incorporated into

DNA in place of thymine. Chain elongation can continue because idoxuridine has a
group. The DNA that has incorporated idoxuridine,however,is more easily
broken and is also not transcribed properly.
30.13Economics of Drugs ¥ Governmental Regulations
The average cost of launching a new drug is $100
Ð$500 million. This cost has to be
amortized quickly by the manufacturer because the starting date of a patent is the date

the drug is first discovered. A patent is good for 20 years from the date it is applied for,

but because it takes an average of 12 years to market a drug after its initial discovery,

the patent protects the discoverer of the drug for an average of only 8 years. It is only

during the 8 years of patent protection that marketing the drug can provide enough

profit so that costs can be recovered and income can be generated to carry out research
3-OHb2-OH3-OHHOCH2CH2OCH2OidoxuridineHerplexapproved for topicalophthalmic useNIHNOacyclovirAclovirused against herpes simplex infectionsNNHNNOH2NribavirinViramida broad-spectrumantiviral agentNNNH2HOHOHOcytarabineCytosarused against acutemyelocytic leukemiaNNNH2OOOHHOOOHOHOOH
NCOBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1225
1226CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of DrugsORPHAN DRUGSBecause of the high cost associated with develop-
ing a drug,pharmaceutical companies are reluc-
tant to carry out research on drugs for rare diseases. Even if a

company were to find a drug,there would be no way to recoup

its expenditure,because of the limited demand. In 1983,the

U.S. Congress passed the Orphan Drugs Act. The act creates

public subsidies to fund research and provides tax credits for up

to 50% of the costs of developing and marketing drugs
Ñcalledorphan drugs
Ñfor diseases or conditions that affect fewer
than 200,000 people. In addition,the company that develops
the drug has four years of exclusive marketing rights if the drug

is nonpatentable. In the 10 years prior to the passage of this act,

fewer than 10 orphan drugs were developed. Today,there are

more than 100,and some 600 others are in development.
Drugs originally developed as orphan drugs include AZT (to
treat AIDS),(to treat ovarian cancer),Exosurf
(to treat respiratory distress syndrome in infants),
and (to treat corneal swelling).
Opticrom¨Neonatal¨Taxol¨on new drugs. In addition,the average lifetime of a drug is only 15 to 20 years. After
that time,it is generally replaced by a newer and improved drug. Only about 1 in 3

drugs actually makes a profit for the company.
Why does it cost so much to develop a new drug? First of all,the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has very high standards that must be met before it approves a

drug for a particular use. Before the U.S. government became involved with the regu-

lation of drugs,it was not uncommon for charlatans to dispense useless and even

harmful medical preparations. Starting in 1906,Congress passed laws governing the

manufacture,distribution,and use of drugs. These laws are amended from time to time

to reflect changing situations. The present law requires that all new drugs be

thoroughly tested for effectiveness and safety before they are used by physicians.
An important factor leading to the high price of many drugs is the low success rate
in progressing from the initial concept to an approved product:Only 1 or 2 of every

100 compounds tested become lead compounds; out of a 100 structural modifications

of a lead compound,only 1 is worthy of further study; and only 10% of these

compounds actually become marketable drugs.
SummaryA drugis a compound that interacts with a biological mol-ecule,triggering a physiological response. Each drug has a

proprietary name
that can be used only by the owner of
the patent,which is valid for 20 years. Once a patent ex-

pires,other drug companies can market the drug under a

generic namethat can be used by any pharmaceutical com-
pany. Drugs that no one wants to develop because they

would be used for diseases or conditions that affect fewer

than 200,000 people are called orphan drugs
. The Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has very high standards

that must be met before it approves a drug for a particular

use. The average cost of launching a new drug is about

$230 million.The prototype for a new drug is called a 
lead com-pound. Changing the structure of a lead compound is called
molecular modification
. A random screen
(or blindscreen
) is a search for a pharmacologically active lead com-
pound without having any information about what structures

might show activity. The technique of relating a property of

a series of compounds to biological activity is known as a

quantitative structure
Ðactivity relationship (QSAR)
.Many drugs exert their physiological effects by binding
to a specific cellular binding site called a 
receptor
. Somedrugs act by 
inhibiting enzymesor by binding to nucleic
acids. Most 
antiviral drugs
are analogs of nucleosides,
interfering with DNA or RNA synthesis and thereby

preventing the virus from replicating.
A bacteriostatic druginhibits the further growth of
bacteria; a bactericidal drugkills the bacteria. In recentyears,many bacteria have become resistant to all antibi-

otics,so 
drug resistance
has become an increasingly im-portant problem in medicinal chemistry.
The therapeutic index of a drug is the ratio of the lethal
dose to the therapeutic dose. The higher the 
therapeuticindex,the greater is the margin of safety of the drug. The
effect of two drugs used in combination is called 
drugsynergism
.Large collections of compounds that can be screened for
biological activity are prepared by 
combinatorial organic
synthesisÑthe synthesis of a group of related compounds
by covalently connecting sets of building blocks.
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1226
Problems1227Key Terms
antiviral drug (p.1225)
bactericidal drug (p.1212)

bacteriostatic drug (p.1212)

biological activity (p.1221)

blind screen (p.1211)

brand name (p.1207)

combinatorial organic synthesis (p.1223)

distribution coefficient (p.1222)

drug (p.1204)

drug resistance (p.1220)
drug synergism (p.1219)
generic name (p.1208)

lead compound (p.1208)

molecular modeling (p.1223)

molecular modification (p.1208)

orphan drug (p.1226)

proprietary name (p.1207)

quantitative structure
Ðactivity
relationship (QSAR) (p.1222)
random screen (p.1211)
rational drug design (p.1221)
receptor (p.1214)

suicide inhibitor (p.1218)

therapeutic index (p.1220)

trademark (p.1207)

trade name (p.1207)
Problems
1.What is the chemical name of each of the following drugs?
a.benzocaine

b.procaine
2.Based on the lead compound for the development of procaine and lidocaine,propose structures for other compounds that you
would like to see tested for use as anesthetics.
3.Which of the following compounds is more likely to exhibit activity as a tranquilizer?
4.Which compound is more likely to be a general anesthetic?
5.What accounts for the ease of imine formation between penicillinase and the sulfone antibiotic that counteracts penicillin
resistance?6.For each of the following pairs of compounds,indicate the compound that you would expect to be a more potent inhibitor of
dihydrofolate reductase:
a.b.7.The lethal dose of tetrahydrocannabinol in mice is and the therapeutic dose is The lethal dose of sodium
pentothal in mice is and the therapeutic dose is Which is the safer drug?
30 mgkg.100 mgkg,20 mgkg.2.0 gkg,CH2CHCH3CH3H2NNCH2CH3orNNH2H2NNCH3CH2CHCH2CH3CH3NNH2H2NNClorNNH2H2NNNO2CH2CHCH3CH3CH2CHCH3CH3NNH2CH3CH2CH2OHorCH3OCH2CH3Nor
CH3OONNCH3COCH3NCH3OAU:Add terms to list? 
or change to lightface
in text?
BRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1227
1228CHAPTER 30The Organic Chemistry of Drugs8.The following compound is a suicide inhibitor of the enzyme that catalyzes amino acid racemization:
Propose a mechanism that explains how this compound irreversibly inactivates the enzyme.
9.Explain how each of the antiviral drugs shown in Section30.12differs from the naturally occurring nucleoside that it most clo
selyresembles.10.Show a mechanism for the formation of a benzodiazepine 4-oxide from the reaction of a quinazoline 3-oxide with methylamine.

11.Show how could be synthesized from benzoyl chloride,
para
-chloroaniline,methyl iodide,and the ethyl ester of glycine.
12.Show how could be synthesized from the indicated starting materials.
CH3NH2SCH3NHCH3CH3SNNHCH2OHCH3NNHCH2CH2SCH2CH2NHCH3CNNCCNNCHSCH2CH2NH2Tagamet¨OCOCNH2ClClClCH3IValiumNNOCH3H2NCH2OCH2CH3Valium¨HCCCHCO
NH2OBRUI30-1204_ 1228r2  18-03-2003  8:55 AM  Page 1228
