 
 
 
 
Contents
 
 
Dedication
 
 
Acknowledgments
 
 
Quote
 
 
Fact
 
 
Prologue
 
 
Chapter 1
 
 
Chapter 2
 
 
Chapter 3
 
 
Chapter 4
 
 
Chapter 5
 
 
Chapter 6
 
 
Chapter 7
 
 
Chapter 8
 
 
Chapter 9
 
 
Chapter 10
 
 
Chapter 11
 
 
Chapter 12
 
 
Chapter 13
 
 
Chapter 14
 
 
Chapter 15
 
 
Chapter 16
 
 
Chapter 17
 
 
Chapter 18
 
 
Chapter 19
 
 
Chapter 20
 
 
Chapter 21
 
 
Chapter 22
 
 
Chapter 23
 
 
Chapter 24
 
 
Chapter 25
 
 
Chapter 26
 
 
Chapter 27
 
 
Chapter 28
 
 
Chapter 29
 
 
Chapter 30
 
 
Chapter 31
 
 
Chapter 32
 
 
Chapter 33
 
 
Chapter 34
 
 
Chapter 35
 
 
Chapter 36
 
 
Chapter 37
 
 
Chapter 38
 
 
Chapter 39
 
 
Chapter 40
 
 
Chapter 41
 
 
Chapter 42
 
 
Chapter 43
 
 
Chapter 44
 
 
Chapter 45
 
 
Chapter 46
 
 
Chapter 47
 
 
Chapter 48
 
 
Chapter 49
 
 
Chapter 50
 
 
Chapter 51
 
 
Chapter 52
 
 
Chapter 53
 
 
Chapter 54
 
 
Chapter 55
 
 
Chapter 56
 
 
Chapter 57
 
 
Chapter 58
 
 
Chapter 59
 
 
Chapter 60
 
 
Chapter 61
 
 
Chapter 62
 
 
Chapter 63
 
 
Chapter 64
 
 
Chapter 65
 
 
Chapter 66
 
 
Chapter 67
 
 
Chapter 68
 
 
Chapter 69
 
 
Chapter 70
 
 
Chapter 71
 
 
Chapter 72
 
 
Chapter 73
 
 
Chapter 74
 
 
Chapter 75
 
 
Chapter 76
 
 
Chapter 77
 
 
Chapter 78
 
 
Chapter 79
 
 
Chapter 80
 
 
Chapter 81
 
 
Chapter 82
 
 
Chapter 83
 
 
Chapter 84
 
 
Chapter 85
 
 
Chapter 86
 
 
Chapter 87
 
 
Chapter 88
 
 
Chapter 89
 
 
Chapter 90
 
 
Chapter 91
 
 
Chapter 92
 
 
Chapter 93
 
 
Chapter 94
 
 
Chapter 95
 
 
Chapter 96
 
 
Chapter 97
 
 
Chapter 98
 
 
Chapter 99
 
 
Chapter 100
 
 
Chapter 101
 
 
Chapter 102
 
 
Chapter 103
 
 
Chapter 104
 
 
Chapter 105
 
 
Chapter 106
 
 
Chapter 107
 
 
Chapter 108
 
 
Chapter 109
 
 
Chapter 110
 
 
Chapter 111
 
 
Chapter 112
 
 
Chapter 113
 
 
Chapter 114
 
 
Chapter 115
 
 
Chapter 116
 
 
Chapter 117
 
 
Chapter 118
 
 
Chapter 119
 
 
Chapter 120
 
 
Chapter 121
 
 
Chapter 122
 
 
Chapter 123
 
 
Chapter 124
 
 
Chapter 125
 
 
Chapter 126
 
 
Chapter 127
 
 
Chapter 128
 
 
Chapter 129
 
 
Chapter 130
 
 
Chapter 131
 
 
Chapter 132
 
 
Chapter 133
 
 
Epilogue
 
 
Also by Dan Brown
 
 
Copyright Page
 
 
 
 
 
FOR BLYTHE 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments
 
 
 
My profound thanks to three dear friends with 
whom I have the great luxury of working: 
my editor, Jason Kaufman; my agent, Heid
e Lange; and my counselor, Michael Rudell. 
In addition, I would like to e
xpress my immense gratitude to
 Doubleday, to my publishers 
around the world, and, of c
ourse, to my readers. 
 
This novel could not have been written w
ithout the generous assistance of countless 
individuals who shared their knowledge and ex
pertise. To all of you, I extend my deep 
appreciation. 
 
 
 
To live in the world without becoming 
 
aware of the meaning of the world is 
 
like wandering about in
 a great library 
 
without touching the books. 
 
The Secret Teachings 
of All Ages
  
 
 
 
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ 
 
 
FACT:
  
 
In 1991, a document was locked in the safe of the director of the CIA. The document is 
still there today. Its cr
yptic text includes references 
to an ancient portal and an unknown 
location underground. The document 
also contains the phrase 
ﬁIt™s buried out there 
somewhere.ﬂ
 
 
 
All organizations in this novel exist, includ
ing the Freemasons, the Invisible College, the 
Office of Security, the SMSC, and th
e Institute of Noetic Sciences. 
 
 
All rituals, science, artwork, and 
monuments in this novel are real.  
 
 
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ 
 
 
 
 
Prologue
 
 
 
House of the Temple
 
 
8:33 P.M.
 
 
The secret
 is how to die.
 
 
Since the beginning of time, the secret had always been how to die. 
 
The thirty-four-year-old initiate gazed down at
 the human skull cradled in his palms. The 
skull was hollow, like a bowl,
 filled with bloodred wine. 
 
Drink it,
 he told himself. 
You have nothing to fear.
 
 
As was tradition, he had begun this journey ador
ned in the ritualistic garb of a medieval 
heretic being led to the gallows, his loose-fi
tting shirt gaping open to reveal his pale 
chest, his left pant leg rolled up to the knee,
 and his right sleeve rolled up to the elbow. 
Around his neck hung a heavy rope nooseŠa ﬁc
able-towﬂ as the brethren called it. 
Tonight, however, like the brethren beari
ng witness, he was dressed as a master. 
 
The assembly of brothers encircling him all we
re adorned in their full regalia of lambskin 
aprons, sashes, and white gloves. Around their necks hung ceremonial jewels that 
glistened like ghostly eyes in the muted light
. Many of these men held powerful stations 
in life, and yet the initiate knew their wo
rldly ranks meant nothing within these walls. 
Here all men were equals, sworn 
brothers sharing a mystical bond. 
 
As he surveyed the daunting assembly, th
e initiate wondered who 
on the outside would 
ever believe that this collection of men 
would assemble in one place . . . much less 
this
 
place. The room looked like a holy sanctuary from the ancient world. 
 
The truth, however, was stranger still. 
 
I am just blocks away
 from the White House.
 
 
This colossal edifice, located at 1733 Sixt
eenth Street NW in Washington, D.C., was a 
replica of a pre-Christian 
templeŠthe temple of King Mausolus, the original 
mausoleum 
. . .
 a place to be taken after death. Outside the 
main entrance, two seventeen-ton sphinxes 
guarded the bronze doors. The in
terior was an ornate labyrinth of ritualistic chambers, 
halls, sealed vaults, lib
raries, and even a hollow wall that
 held the remains of two human 
bodies. The initiate had been told every room 
in this building held a secret, and yet he 
knew no room held deeper secrets than the gi
gantic chamber in which he was currently 
kneeling with a skull cradled in his palms. 
 
The Temple Room.
 
 
This room was a perfect square. And caver
nous. The ceiling soared an astonishing one 
hundred feet overhead, supported by monolithic
 columns of green granite. A tiered 
gallery of dark Russian walnut seats with
 hand-tooled pigskin encircled the room. A 
thirty-three-foot-tall throne dominated the 
western wall, with a concealed pipe organ 
opposite it. The walls were a kaleidoscope of
 ancient symbols . . . Egyptian, Hebraic, 
astronomical, alchemical, and others yet unknown. 
 
Tonight, the Temple Room was lit by a series of precisely arranged candles. Their dim 
glow was aided only by a pale shaft of 
moonlight that filtered down through the 
expansive oculus in the ceiling and illumina
ted the room's most startling featureŠan 
enormous altar hewn from a solid block of 
polished Belgian black marble, situated dead 
center of the square chamber. 
 
The secret is how to die,
 the initiate reminded himself. 
 
ﬁIt is time,ﬂ a voice whispered. 
 
The initiate let his gaze climb the distinguish
ed white-robed figure standing before him. 
The Supreme Worshipful Master.
 The man, in his late fiftie
s, was an American icon, well 
loved, robust, and incalculably wealthy. His 
once-dark hair was turning silver, and his 
famous visage reflected a lifetime 
of power and a vigorous intellect. 
 
ﬁTake the oath,ﬂ the Worshipful Master sai
d, his voice soft like falling snow. ﬁComplete 
your journey.ﬂ 
 
The initiate's journey, like all such journeys
, had begun at the first degree. On that night, 
in a ritual similar to this one, the Worshipf
ul Master had blindfol
ded him with a velvet 
hoodwink and pressed a ceremonial dagger to
 his bare chest, demanding: ﬁDo you 
seriously declare on your honor
, uninfluenced by mercenary or any other unworthy 
motive, that you freely and volunt
arily offer yourself as a candi
date for the mysteries and 
privileges of this brotherhood?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI do,ﬂ the initiate had lied. 
 
ﬁThen let this be a sting to your consciousne
ss,ﬂ the master had warned him, ﬁas well as 
instant death should you ever
 betray the secrets to
 be imparted to you.ﬂ 
 
At the time, the initiate had felt no fear. 
They will never know my true purpose here.
 
 
Tonight, however, he sensed a foreboding so
lemnity in the Temple Room, and his mind 
began replaying all the dire warnings he had 
been given on his journey, threats of terrible 
consequences if he ever shared the an
cient secrets he was about to learn: 
Throat cut from 
ear to ear . . . tongue torn out by its roots . . . bowels taken out and burned . . . scattered 
to the four winds of heaven . . . heart plu
cked out and given to the 
beasts of the fieldŠ
 
 
ﬁBrother,ﬂ the gray-eyed master said, placi
ng his left hand on the initiate's shoulder. 
ﬁTake the final oath.ﬂ 
 
Steeling himself for the last step of his jour
ney, the initiate shifte
d his muscular frame 
and turned his attention back 
to the skull cradled in his pa
lms. The crimson wine looked 
almost black in the dim candlelight. The cham
ber had fallen deathly 
silent, and he could 
feel all of the witnesses watchi
ng him, waiting for him to take his final oath and join their 
elite ranks. 
 
Tonight,
 he thought, 
something is taking place within these walls that has never before 
occurred in the history of this 
brotherhood. Not once, in centuries.
 
 
He knew it would be the spark . . . a
nd it would give him unfathomable power. 
Energized, he drew a breath and spoke al
oud the same words that countless men had 
spoken before him in countries all over the world. 
 
ﬁMay this wine I now drink become a deadly poi
son to me . . . should I ever knowingly or 
willfully violate my oath.ﬂ
 
 
His words echoed in the hollow space. 
 
Then all was quiet. 
 
Steadying his hands, the initiate raised the s
kull to his mouth and fe
lt his lips touch the 
dry bone. He closed his eyes and tipped the 
skull toward his mouth, drinking the wine in 
long, deep swallows. When the last drop was gone, he lowered the skull. 
 
For an instant, he thought he felt his lungs
 growing tight, and hi
s heart began to pound 
wildly. 
My God, they know!
 Then, as quickly as it came, the feeling passed. 
 
A pleasant warmth began to stream th
rough his body. The initiate exhaled, smiling 
inwardly as he gazed up at the unsuspecti
ng gray-eyed man who had foolishly admitted 
him into this brotherhood'
s most secretive ranks. 
 
Soon you will lose everything you hold most dear.
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 1 
 
 
 
The Otis
 elevator climbing the south pillar of
 the Eiffel Tower was overflowing with 
tourists. Inside the cramped lift, an auster
e businessman in a pressed suit gazed down at 
the boy beside him. ﬁYou look pale, s
on. You should have stayed on the ground.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m okay . . .ﬂ the boy answered, struggling 
to control his anxiet
y. ﬁI™ll get out on the 
next level.ﬂ 
I can™t breathe.
 
 
The man leaned closer. ﬁI thought by now you 
would have gotten over this.ﬂ He brushed 
the child™s cheek affectionately. 
 
The boy felt ashamed to disappoint his fath
er, but he could bare
ly hear through the 
ringing in his ears. 
I can™t breathe. I™ve got to get out of this box!
 
 
The elevator operator was saying something r
eassuring about the lift™s articulated pistons 
and puddled-iron construction. Far beneath them, 
the streets of Paris stretched out in all 
directions. 
 
Almost there,
 the boy told himself, craning his 
neck and looking up at the unloading 
platform. 
Just hold on.
 
 
As the lift angled steeply toward the upper vi
ewing deck, the shaft began to narrow, its 
massive struts contracting in
to a tight, vertical tunnel. 
 
ﬁDad, I don™t thinkŠﬂ 
 
Suddenly a staccato crack echoed overhead. Th
e carriage jerked, swaying awkwardly to 
one side. Frayed cables began whipping around 
the carriage, thrashing like snakes. The 
boy reached out for his father. 
 
ﬁDad!ﬂ 
 
Their eyes locked for one terrifying second. 
 
Then the bottom dropped out. 
 
Robert Langdon jolted upright in his soft l
eather seat, startling out of the semiconscious 
daydream. He was sitting all alone in the en
ormous cabin of a Falcon 2000EX corporate 
jet as it bounced its way through turbulence. 
In the background, the dual Pratt & Whitney 
engines hummed evenly. 
 
ﬁMr. Langdon?ﬂ The intercom crackled ove
rhead. ﬁWe™re on final approach.ﬂ 
 
Langdon sat up straight and slid his lecture notes
 back into his leather daybag. He™d been 
halfway through reviewing Masonic sym
bology when his mind had drifted. The 
daydream about his late father, Langdon susp
ected, had been stirred by this morning™s 
unexpected invitation from Langdon™s 
longtime mentor, Peter Solomon. 
 
The other man I never want to disappoint.
 
 
The fifty-eight-year-old ph
ilanthropist, historian, and 
scientist had taken Langdon under 
his wing nearly thirty years ago, in many ways filling the void left by Langdon™s father™s 
death. Despite the man™s influential fam
ily dynasty and massive wealth, Langdon had 
found humility and warmth in Solomon™s soft gray eyes. 
 
Outside the window the sun had set, but 
Langdon could still ma
ke out the slender 
silhouette of the world™s larges
t obelisk, rising on the horizon 
like the spire of an ancient 
gnomon. The 555-foot marble-faced obelisk mark
ed this nation™s heart. All around the 
spire, the meticulous geometry of st
reets and monuments radiated outward. 
 
Even from the air, Washington, D.C
., exuded an almost mystical power. 
 
Langdon loved this city, and as the jet touche
d down, he felt a rising excitement about 
what lay ahead. The jet taxied to a private 
terminal somewhere in the vast expanse of 
Dulles International Airport and came to a stop. 
 
Langdon gathered his things, thanked the pilots
, and stepped out of the jet™s luxurious 
interior onto the foldout
 staircase. The cold Ja
nuary air felt liberating. 
 
Breathe, Robert,
 he thought, appreciati
ng the wide-open spaces. 
 
A blanket of white fog crept across the r
unway, and Langdon had the sensation he was 
stepping into a marsh as he descended onto the misty tarmac. 
 
ﬁHello! Hello!ﬂ a singsong British voice shouted from across the tarmac. ﬁProfessor 
Langdon?ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked up to see a middle-aged woma
n with a badge and 
clipboard hurrying 
toward him, waving happily as he approached. Curly blond hair protruded from under a 
stylish knit wool hat. 
 
ﬁWelcome to Washington, sir!ﬂ 
 
Langdon smiled. ﬁThank you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMy name is Pam, from passenger services.ﬂ
 The woman spoke with an exuberance that 
was almost unsettling. ﬁIf you™ll come w
ith me, sir, your car is waiting.ﬂ 
 
Langdon followed her across the runway towa
rd the Signature terminal, which was 
surrounded by glistening private jets. 
A taxi stand for the rich and famous.
 
 
ﬁI hate to embarrass you, Professor,ﬂ th
e woman said, sounding sheepish, ﬁbut you 
are
 
the Robert Langdon who writes books about
 symbols and religion, aren™t you?ﬂ 
 
Langdon hesitated and then nodded. 
 
ﬁI thought so!ﬂ she said, beaming. ﬁMy 
book group read your book about the sacred 
feminine and the church! What a delicious 
scandal that one caused! You do enjoy putting 
the fox in the henhouse!ﬂ 
 
Langdon smiled. ﬁScandal wasn™t
 really my intention.ﬂ 
 
The woman seemed to sense Langdon was not 
in the mood to discuss his work. ﬁI™m 
sorry. Listen to me rattling on. I know you probabl
y get tired of being 
recognized . . . but 
it™s your own fault.ﬂ She playfully motione
d to his clothing. ﬁYour uniform gave you 
away.ﬂ 
 
My uniform?
 Langdon glanced down at his attire. He
 was wearing his usual charcoal 
turtleneck, Harris Tweed jacket, 
khakis, and collegiate cordovan loafers . . . his standard 
attire for the classroom, lecture circuit, author photos, and social events. 
 
The woman laughed. ﬁThose turtlenecks you wear
 are so dated. You™d look much sharper 
in a tie!ﬂ 
 
No chance,
 Langdon thought. 
Little nooses.
 
 
Neckties had been required six days a 
week when Langdon attended Phillips Exeter 
Academy, and despite the headmaster™s romantic 
claims that the origin of the cravat went 
back to the silk 
fascalia
 worn by Roman orators to warm their vocal cords, Langdon 
knew that, etymologically, 
cravat
 actually derived from a ruthless band of ﬁCroatﬂ 
mercenaries who donned knotted neckerchiefs before they stormed into battle. To this 
day, this ancient battle garb was donned by 
modern office warriors hoping to intimidate 
their enemies in daily boardroom battles. 
 
ﬁThanks for the advice,ﬂ Langdon said with a chuc
kle. ﬁI™ll consider a 
tie in the future.ﬂ 
 
Mercifully, a professional-looki
ng man in a dark suit got out 
of a sleek Lincoln Town Car 
parked near the terminal and held up his fi
nger. ﬁMr. Langdon? I™m Charles with Beltway 
Limousine.ﬂ He opened the passenger door
. ﬁGood evening, sir. Welcome to 
Washington.ﬂ 
 
Langdon tipped Pam for her hospitality and then 
climbed into the plus
h interior of the 
Town Car. The driver showed him the temp
erature controls, the bottled water, and the 
basket of hot muffins. Seconds later, La
ngdon was speeding away on a private access 
road. 
So this is how the other half lives.
 
 
As the driver gunned the car up Windsock Drive,
 he consulted his passenger manifest and 
placed a quick call. ﬁThis is Beltway Limous
ine,ﬂ the driver said with professional 
efficiency. ﬁI was asked to confirm once my 
passenger had landed.ﬂ He paused. ﬁYes, sir. 
Your guest, Mr. Langdon, has arri
ved, and I will deliver him to the Capitol Building by 
seven P.M. You™re welcome, sir.ﬂ He hung up. 
 
Langdon had to smile. 
No stone left unturned
. Peter Solomon™s attention to detail was one 
of his most potent assets, allowing him to manage his subs
tantial power with apparent 
ease. 
A few billion dollars in the 
bank doesn™t hurt either.
 
 
Langdon settled into the plush leat
her seat and closed his eyes 
as the noise of the airport 
faded behind him. The U.S. Capitol was a ha
lf hour away, and he appreciated the time 
alone to gather his thought
s. Everything had happened so
 quickly today that Langdon 
only now had begun to think in earnest abou
t the incredible evening that lay ahead. 
 
Arriving under a veil of secrecy,
 Langdon thought, amused by the prospect. 
 
Ten miles from the Capitol Building, a lone
 figure was eagerly preparing for Robert 
Langdon™s arrival. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 2 
 
 
 
The one
 who called himself Mal™akh 
pressed the tip of the ne
edle against his shaved 
head, sighing with pleasure as the sharp tool plunged in and 
out of his flesh. The soft hum 
of the electric device was addictive . . . as was 
the bite of the needle sliding deep into his 
dermis and depositing its dye. 
 
I am a masterpiece.
 
 
The goal of tattooing was ne
ver beauty. The goal was 
change
. From the scarified Nubian 
priests of 2000 B.C., to the tattooed acolytes of
 the Cybele cult of ancient Rome, to the 
moko
 scars of the modern Maori, humans have
 tattooed themselves as a way of offering 
up their bodies in partial sacrifice, enduri
ng the physical pain of embellishment and 
emerging changed beings. 
 
Despite the ominous admonitions
 of Leviticus 19:28, which fo
rbade the marking of one™s 
flesh, tattoos had become a rite of passage 
shared by millions of people in the modern 
ageŠeveryone from clean-cut 
teenagers to hard-core drug us
ers to suburban housewives. 
 
The act of tattooing one™s sk
in was a transformative declaration of power, an 
announcement to the world: 
I am in control of my own flesh.
 The intoxicating feeling of 
control derived from physical transformation had addicted millions to flesh-altering 
practices . . . cosmetic surgery, body pier
cing, bodybuilding, and steroids . . . even 
bulimia and transgendering. 
The human spirit craves mastery over its carnal shell.
 
 
A single bell chimed on Mal™akh™s grandfathe
r clock, and he looked up. Six thirty P.M. 
Leaving his tools, he wrapped the Kiryu s
ilk robe around his nake
d, six-foot-three body 
and strode down the hall. The air inside 
this sprawling mansion was heavy with the 
pungent fragrance of his skin dyes and smoke
 from the beeswax candles he used to 
sterilize his needles. The towering young ma
n moved down the corridor past priceless 
Italian antiquesŠa Piranesi etching, a Savonarola chair, a silver Bugarini oil lamp. 
 
He glanced through a floor-to-ceiling window as
 he passed, admiring the classical skyline 
in the distance. The luminous dome of the 
U.S. Capitol glowed with solemn power 
against the dark winter sky. 
 
This is where it is hidden,
 he thought. 
It is buried out there somewhere.
 
 
Few men knew it existed . . . and even fewe
r knew its awesome power or the ingenious 
way in which it had been hidden. To this day, 
it remained this country™s greatest untold 
secret. Those few who 
did
 know the truth kept it hidde
n behind a veil of symbols, 
legends, and allegory. 
 
Now they have opened their doors to me,
 Mal™akh thought. 
 
Three weeks ago, in a dark ritual witnesse
d by America™s most influential men, Mal™akh 
had ascended to the thirty-third degree, 
the highest echelon of the world™s oldest 
surviving brotherhood. Despite Mal™akh™s ne
w rank, the brethren had told him nothing. 
Nor will they,
 he knew. That was not how it worked. Th
ere were circles within circles . . . 
brotherhoods within brotherhoods. Even if Ma
l™akh waited years, he might never earn 
their ultimate trust. 
 
Fortunately, he did not need their tr
ust to obtain their deepest secret. 
 
My initiation served its purpose.
 
 
Now, energized by what lay ahead, he strode
 toward his bedroom. Throughout his entire 
home, audio speakers broadcast the eerie strain
s of a rare recording of a castrato singing 
the ﬁLux Aeternaﬂ from the Verdi RequiemŠa
 reminder of a previous life. Mal™akh 
touched a remote control to bring on the t
hundering ﬁDies Irae.ﬂ Th
en, against a backdrop 
of crashing timpani and parallel fifths, he bounded up the marble staircase, his robe 
billowing as he ascended on sinewy legs. 
 
As he ran, his empty stomach growled in protest. For two days now, Mal™akh had fasted, 
consuming only water, preparing his body 
in accordance with the ancient ways. 
Your 
hunger will be satisfied by dawn,
 he reminded himself. 
Along with your pain.
 
 
Mal™akh entered his bedroom sanctuary with 
reverence, locking the door behind him. As 
he moved toward his dressing area, he paused, feeling himself drawn to the enormous 
gilded mirror. Unable to resist, he turned
 and faced his own reflection. Slowly, as if 
unwrapping a priceless gift, Ma
l™akh opened his robe to unveil his naked form. The 
vision awed him. 
 
I am a masterpiece.
 
 
His massive body was shaved and smooth. He lo
wered his gaze first to his feet, which 
were tattooed with the scales 
and talons of a hawk. Above th
at, his muscular legs were 
tattooed as carved pillarsŠhis 
left leg spiraled and his 
right vertically striated. 
Boaz and 
Jachin
. His groin and abdomen formed a deco
rated archway, above which his powerful 
chest was emblazoned with the double-headed 
phoenix . . . each head in profile with its 
visible eye formed by one of Mal™akh™s nippl
es. His shoulders, neck, face, and shaved 
head were completely covered with an intric
ate tapestry of ancien
t symbols and sigils. 
 
I am an artifact . . . an evolving icon.
 
 
One mortal man had seen Mal™akh naked, eigh
teen hours earlier. The man had shouted in 
fear. ﬁGood God, you™re a demon!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIf you perceive me as such,ﬂ Mal™akh had re
plied, understanding as had the ancients that 
angels and demons were identicalŠinterchange
able archetypesŠall a matter of polarity: 
the guardian angel who conquered your enemy 
in battle was perceived by your enemy as 
a demon destroyer. 
 
Mal™akh tipped his face down now and got an obli
que view of the top of his head. There, 
within the crownlike halo, shone a small circ
le of pale, untattooed flesh. This carefully 
guarded canvas was Mal™akh™s only remaining piece of virgin skin. The sacred space had 
waited patiently . . . and tonight, it would be
 filled. Although Mal™akh did not yet possess 
what he required to complete his masterpi
ece, he knew the moment was fast approaching. 
 
Exhilarated by his reflection, he could already 
feel his power growing. 
He closed his robe 
and walked to the window, again gazing out at the mystical city before him. 
It is buried 
out there somewhere.
 
 
Refocusing on the task at hand, Mal™akh went to
 his dressing table a
nd carefully applied a 
base of concealer makeup to his face, scal
p, and neck until his tattoos had disappeared. 
Then he donned the special set of clothing a
nd other items he had meticulously prepared 
for this evening. When he finished, he checked
 himself in the mirror. Satisfied, he ran a 
soft palm across his smooth scalp and smiled. 
 
It is out there,
 he thought. 
And tonight, one man will help me find it.
 
 
As Mal™akh exited his home, he prepared hims
elf for the event that would soon shake the 
U.S. Capitol Building. He had gone to enorm
ous lengths to arrange all the pieces for 
tonight. 
 
And now, at last, his final pawn had entered the game. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 3 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 was busy reviewing his note cards 
when the hum of the Town Car™s 
tires changed pitch on the road beneath him.
 Langdon glanced up, surprised to see where 
they were. 
 
Memorial Bridge already?
 
 
He put down his notes and gazed out at the 
calm waters of the Potomac passing beneath 
him. A heavy mist hovered on the surface.
 Aptly named, Foggy Bottom had always 
seemed a peculiar site on which to build the 
nation™s capital. Of all the places in the New 
World, the forefathers had chosen a soggy riverside marsh on which to lay the 
cornerstone of their utopian society. 
 
Langdon gazed left, across the Tidal Basin, toward the gracefully rounded silhouette of 
the Jefferson MemorialŠAmerica™s Pantheon, as 
many called it. Directly in front of the 
car, the Lincoln Memorial rose
 with rigid austerity, its or
thogonal lines reminiscent of 
Athens™s ancient Parthenon. But it was fa
rther away that Langdon saw the city™s 
centerpieceŠthe same spire he had seen from th
e air. Its architectural inspiration was far, 
far older than the Romans or the Greeks. 
 
America™s Egyptian obelisk.
 
 
The monolithic spire of the Washington Monument loomed dead ahead, illuminated 
against the sky like the maje
stic mast of a ship. From Langdon™s oblique angle, the 
obelisk appeared ungrounded toni
ght . . . swaying against th
e dreary sky as if on an 
unsteady sea. Langdon felt similarly ungrounde
d. His visit to Washington had been 
utterly unexpected. 
I woke up this morning anticipating a quiet Sunday at home . . . and 
now I™m a few minutes away from the U.S. Capitol.
 
 
This morning at four forty-five, Langdon ha
d plunged into dead-calm water, beginning 
his day as he always did, sw
imming fifty laps in the desert
ed Harvard Pool. His physique 
was not quite what it had been in his college
 days as a water-polo all-American, but he 
was still lean and toned, resp
ectable for a man in his forties. The only difference now was 
the amount of effort it took Langdon to keep it that way. 
 
When Langdon arrived home ar
ound six, he began his morning ritual of hand-grinding 
Sumatra coffee beans and savoring the exotic sc
ent that filled his kitchen. This morning, 
however, he was surprised to see the b
linking red light on hi
s voice-mail display. 
Who 
calls at six A.M. on a Sunday?
 He pressed the button a
nd listened to the message. 
 
ﬁGood morning, Professor Langdon, I™m terribly 
sorry for this early-morning call.ﬂ The 
polite voice was noticeably hesitant, with a hi
nt of a southern accent. ﬁMy name is 
Anthony Jelbart, and I™m Peter Solomon™s ex
ecutive assistant. Mr. Solomon told me 
you™re an early riser . . . he 
has been trying to reach you this
 morning on short notice. As 
soon as you receive this message, would you be
 so kind as to call Peter directly? You 
probably have his new private li
ne, but if not, it™s 202-329-5746.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt a sudden concern for his old friend. Peter Solomon was impeccably well-
bred and courteous, and certainly not the 
kind of man to call at daybreak on a Sunday 
unless something was very wrong. 
 
Langdon left his coffee half made and hurried
 toward his study to return the call. 
 
I hope he™s okay.
 
 
Peter Solomon had been a friend, mentor
, and, although only twelve years Langdon™s 
senior, a father figure to him 
ever since their first meeting at Princeton University. As a 
sophomore, Langdon had been required to atte
nd an evening guest lecture by the well-
known young historian and philanthropist. So
lomon had spoken with a contagious 
passion, presenting a dazzling vision of semiot
ics and archetypal hist
ory that had sparked 
in Langdon what would later become his lifelo
ng passion for symbols. It was not Peter 
Solomon™s brilliance, however, but the humility 
in his gentle gray eyes that had given 
Langdon the courage to write him a thank-
you letter. The young sophomore had never 
dreamed that Peter Solomon, 
one of America™s wealthie
st and most intriguing young 
intellectuals, would ever write back. But Solo
mon did. And it had been the beginning of a 
truly gratifying friendship. 
 
A prominent academic whose quiet manner belied his powerful heritage, Peter Solomon 
came from the ultrawealthy Solomon famil
y, whose names appeared on buildings and 
universities all over the nation. 
Like the Rothschilds in Europe, the surname Solomon had 
always carried the mystique of American 
royalty and success. Peter had inherited the 
mantle at a young age after the death of his fa
ther, and now, at fifty-eight, he had held 
numerous positions of power in his life. He currently served as the head of the 
Smithsonian Institution. Langdon occasionally ri
bbed Peter that the lone tarnish on his 
sterling pedigree was his diploma from
 a second-rate universityŠYale. 
 
Now, as Langdon entered his study, he was surp
rised to see that he had received a fax 
from Peter as well. 
Peter Solomon
 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
 
THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
 
 
 
Good morning, Robert,
 
 
I need to speak with you at once. Please ca
ll me this morning as soon as you can at 
202-329-5746.
 
 
Peter
  
 
Langdon immediately dialed the 
number, sitting down at his 
hand-carved oak desk to 
wait as the call went through. 
 
ﬁOffice of Peter Solomon,ﬂ the familiar voice of the assistant answered. ﬁThis is 
Anthony. May I help you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHello, this is Robert Langdon. Y
ou left me a message earlierŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, Professor Langdon!ﬂ The young man 
sounded relieved. ﬁThank you for calling 
back so quickly. Mr. Solomon is eager to sp
eak to you. Let me tell him you™re on the line. 
May I put you on hold?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ 
 
As Langdon waited for Solomon to get on the li
ne, he gazed down at Peter™s name atop 
the Smithsonian letterhead and had to smile. 
Not many slackers in the Solomon clan.
 
Peter™s ancestral tree burgeoned 
with the names of wealthy business magnates, influential 
politicians, and a number of distinguished 
scientists, some even fellows of London™s 
Royal Society. Solomon™s only living family 
member, his younger sist
er, Katherine, had 
apparently inherited the scie
nce gene, because she was now a leading figure in a new 
cutting-edge discipline called Noetic Science. 
 
All Greek to me,
 Langdon thought, amused to recall Katherine™s unsuccessful attempt to 
explain Noetic Science to him at a party 
at her brother™s home last year. Langdon had 
listened carefully and then replied, ﬁS
ounds more like magic than science.ﬂ 
 
Katherine winked playfully. ﬁThey™re
 closer than you think, Robert.ﬂ 
 
Now Solomon™s assistant return
ed to the phone. ﬁI™m sorry, Mr
. Solomon is trying to get 
off a conference call. Things are a li
ttle chaotic here this morning.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s not a problem. I can easily call back.ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, he asked me to fill you in on his reason for contacting you, if you don™t 
mind?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course not.ﬂ 
 
The assistant inhaled deeply. ﬁAs you probabl
y know, Professor, every year here in 
Washington, the board of the Smithsonian hosts 
a private gala to thank our most generous 
supporters. Many of the country
™s cultural elite attend.ﬂ 
 
Langdon knew his own bank account had too few zeros
 to qualify him as culturally elite, 
but he wondered if maybe Solomon was goi
ng to invite him to attend nonetheless. 
 
ﬁThis year, as is customary,ﬂ the assistant 
continued, ﬁthe dinner will be preceded by a 
keynote address. We™ve been lucky enough to secure the National Statuary Hall for that 
speech.ﬂ 
 
The best room in all of D.C.,
 Langdon thought, recalling a politi
cal lecture he had once 
attended in the dramatic semicircular hall. 
It was hard to forget five hundred folding 
chairs splayed in a perfect arc,
 surrounded by thirty-eight life-
size statues, in a room that 
had once served as the nation™s original House of Representatives chamber. 
 
ﬁThe problem is this,ﬂ the man said. ﬁOur speak
er has fallen ill and has just informed us 
she will be unable to give the address.ﬂ He paused awkwardly. ﬁThis means we are 
desperate for a replacement speaker. And 
Mr. Solomon is hoping you would consider 
filling in.ﬂ 
 
Langdon did a double take. ﬁMe?ﬂ This was not at
 all what he had expected. ﬁI™m sure 
Peter could find a far better substitute.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re Mr. Solomon™s first choice, Professo
r, and you™re being much too modest. The 
institution™s guests would be
 thrilled to hear from you, and Mr. Solomon thought you 
could give the same lecture you gave on B
ookspan TV a few years back? That way, you 
wouldn™t have to prepare a thing. He sa
id your talk involved symbolism in the 
architecture of our nation™
s capitalŠit sounds absolutely perfect for the venue.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was not so sure. ﬁIf I recall, that 
lecture had more to do with the Masonic 
history of the building thanŠﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly! As you know, Mr. Solomon is a Mason,
 as are many of his professional friends 
who will be in attendance. I™m sure they w
ould love to hear you speak on the topic.ﬂ 
 
I admit it would be easy.
 Langdon had kept the lecture note
s from every talk he™d ever 
given. ﬁI suppose I could consider 
it. What date is the event?ﬂ 
 
The assistant cleared his throat, sounding s
uddenly uncomfortable. ﬁWell, actually, sir, 
it™s tonight.ﬂ 
 
Langdon laughed out loud. ﬁTonight?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s why it™s so hectic 
here this morning. The Smithsonian is in a deeply 
embarrassing predicament . . .ﬂ The assistant 
spoke more hurriedly now. ﬁMr. Solomon is 
ready to send a private jet to Boston for you. 
The flight is only an hour, and you would be 
back home before midnight. You™re familiar with the private air terminal at Boston™s 
Logan Airport?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI am,ﬂ Langdon admitted reluctantly. 
No wonder Peter always gets his way.
 
 
ﬁWonderful! Would you be willi
ng to meet the jet there at
 say . . . five o™clock?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou haven™t left me much choi
ce, have you?ﬂ Langdon chuckled. 
 
ﬁI just want to make Mr. Solomon happy, sir.ﬂ 
 
Peter has that effect on people.
 Langdon considered it a long moment, seeing no way out. 
ﬁAll right. Tell him I can do it.ﬂ  
 
ﬁOutstanding!ﬂ the assistant exclaimed, s
ounding deeply relieved. He gave Langdon the 
jet™s tail number and various other information.  
 
When Langdon finally hung up, he wondered if 
Peter Solomon had ever been told no. 
 
Returning to his coffee preparation, Langdon 
scooped some additional beans into the 
grinder. 
A little extra caffeine this morning,
 he thought. 
It™s going to be a long day.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 4 
 
 
 
The U.S.
 Capitol Building stands regally at th
e eastern end of the National Mall, on a 
raised plateau that city designer Pierre L™En
fant described as ﬁa pedestal waiting for a 
monument.ﬂ The Capitol™s massive footprint m
easures more than 750 feet in length and 
350 feet deep. Housing more than sixteen acre
s of floor space, it contains an astonishing 
541 rooms. The neoclassical architecture is 
meticulously designed to echo the grandeur 
of ancient Rome, whose ideals were the inspiration for America™s founders in 
establishing the laws and culture of the new republic. 
 
The new security checkpoint for tourists entering the Capitol Building is located deep 
within the recently completed subterranean 
visitor center, beneath a magnificent glass 
skylight that frames the Capitol Dome. 
Newly hired security guard Alfonso Nuñez 
carefully studied the male visitor now appr
oaching his checkpoint. The man had a shaved 
head and had been lingering in the lobby, 
completing a phone call before entering the 
building. His right arm was in a sling, and he 
moved with a slight limp. He was wearing a 
tattered army-navy surplus coat, which, comb
ined with his shaved head, made Nuñez 
guess military. Those who had served in the U.S. armed forces were among the most 
common visitors to Washington. 
 
ﬁGood evening, sir,ﬂ Nuñez said, following the 
security protocol of verbally engaging 
any male visitor who entered alone.  
 
ﬁHello,ﬂ the visitor said, gl
ancing around at the nearly de
serted entry. ﬁQuiet night.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNFC play-offs,ﬂ Nuñez replied. ﬁEveryone™s
 watching the Redskins tonight.ﬂ Nuñez 
wished he were, too, but this was his firs
t month on the job, and he™d drawn the short 
straw. ﬁMetal objects 
in the dish, please.ﬂ 
 
As the visitor fumbled to empty the pockets 
of his long coat with his one working hand, 
Nuñez watched him carefully. Human instinct 
made special allowances for the injured 
and handicapped, but it was an instinct 
Nuñez had been trained to override. 
 
Nuñez waited while the visitor removed from 
his pockets the usual assortment of loose 
change, keys, and a couple of cell phones.
 ﬁSprain?ﬂ Nuñez asked, eyeing the man™s 
injured hand, which appeared to be wra
pped in a series of 
thick Ace bandages. 
 
The bald man nodded. ﬁSlipped on the ice. A week ago. Still hurts like hell.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSorry to hear that. Walk through, please.ﬂ 
 
The visitor limped through the detector
, and the machine buzzed in protest. 
 
The visitor frowned. ﬁI was afraid of that. 
I™m wearing a ring under these bandages. My 
finger was too swollen to get it off, 
so the doctors wrapped right over it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo problem,ﬂ Nuñez said. ﬁI™ll use the wand.ﬂ 
 
Nuñez ran the metal-detection wand over the 
visitor™s wrapped hand. As expected, the 
only metal he detected was a large lump on 
the man™s injured ring finger. Nuñez took his 
time rubbing the metal detector over every inch
 of the man™s sling and finger. He knew 
his supervisor was probably monitoring hi
m on the closed circuit in the building™s 
security center, and N
uñez needed this job. 
Always better to be cautious.
 He carefully slid 
the wand up inside the man™s sling. 
 
The visitor winced in pain. 
 
ﬁSorry.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s okay,ﬂ the man said. ﬁYou can™t
 be too careful these days.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAin™t that the truth.ﬂ Nuñez liked this guy. 
Strangely, that counted for a lot around here. 
Human instinct was America™s first line of de
fense against terrorism. It was a proven fact 
that human intuition was a more accurate detector
 of danger than all the electronic gear in 
the worldŠthe 
gift of fear,
 as one of their security 
reference books termed it. 
 
In this case, Nuñez™s instincts sensed not
hing that caused him any fear. The only oddity 
that he noticed, now that they were sta
nding so close, was that this tough-looking guy 
appeared to have used some kind of se
lf-tanner or concealer makeup on his face. 
Whatever
. 
Everyone hates to be pale in the winter.
 
 
ﬁYou™re fine,ﬂ Nuñez said, comple
ting his sweep and stowing the wand. 
 
ﬁThanks.ﬂ The man started collectin
g his belongings from the tray. 
 
As he did, Nuñez noticed that the two finge
rs protruding from his bandage each bore a 
tattoo; the tip of his index finger bore the im
age of a crown, and the tip of his thumb bore 
that of a star. 
Seems everyone has tattoos these days,
 Nuñez thought, alth
ough the pads of 
his fingertips seemed like painful sp
ots to get them. 
ﬁThose tats hurt?ﬂ 
 
The man glanced down at his fingertips a
nd chuckled. ﬁLess than you might think.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLucky,ﬂ Nuñez said. ﬁMine hurt 
a lot. I got a mermaid on my 
back when I was in boot 
camp.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA mermaid?ﬂ The bald man chuckled. 
 
ﬁYeah,ﬂ he said, feeling sheepish. ﬁThe mistakes we make in our youth.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI hear you,ﬂ the bald man said. ﬁI made 
a big mistake in my youth, too. Now I wake up 
with her every morning.ﬂ 
 
They both laughed as the man headed off. 
 
 
Child™s play,
 Mal™akh thought as he m
oved past Nuñez and up the escalator toward the 
Capitol Building. The entry had been easie
r than anticipated. Mal™akh™s slouching 
posture and padded belly had hidden his true 
physique, while the makeup on his face and 
hands had hidden the tattoos that covered 
his body. The true genius, however, was the 
sling, which disguised the potent object Ma
l™akh was transporting into the building. 
 
A gift for the one man on earth who can help me obtain what I seek.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 5 
 
 
 
The world™s
 largest and most technologically ad
vanced museum is also one of the 
world™s best-kept secrets. It houses more
 pieces than the He
rmitage, the Vatican 
Museum, and the New York Metropolitan . 
. . combined. Yet despite its magnificent 
collection, few members of the public are ever 
invited inside its heavily guarded walls. 
 
Located at 4210 Silver Hill Road just outsi
de of Washington, D.C., the museum is a 
massive zigzag-shaped edifice constructed 
of five interconnected podsŠeach pod larger 
than a football field. The building™s bluish meta
l exterior barely hint
s at the strangeness 
withinŠa six-hundred-thousand-square-foot alie
n world that contains
 a ﬁdead zone,ﬂ a 
ﬁwet pod,ﬂ and more than twelve miles of storage cabinets. 
 
Tonight, scientist Katherine Solomon was fee
ling unsettled as she drove her white Volvo 
up to the building™s main security gate. 
 
The guard smiled. ﬁNot a football fan, Ms. 
Solomon?ﬂ He lowered the volume on the 
Redskins play-off pregame show. 
 
Katherine forced a tense smile. ﬁIt™s Sunday night.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh, that™s right. Your meeting.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIs he here yet?ﬂ she asked anxiously. 
 
He glanced down at his paperwor
k. ﬁI don™t see him on the log.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m early.ﬂ Katherine gave a friendly wave 
and continued up the winding access road to 
her usual parking spot at the bottom of the sm
all, two-tiered lot. 
She began collecting her 
things and gave herself a quick check in the 
rearview mirrorŠmore out
 of force of habit 
than actual vanity. 
 
Katherine Solomon had been blessed with 
the resilient Mediterranean skin of her 
ancestry, and even at fifty years old she ha
d a smooth olive complexion. She used almost 
no makeup and wore her thick black hair uns
tyled and down. Like her older brother, 
Peter, she had gray eyes and a slender, patrician elegance. 
 
You two might as well be twins,
 people often told them. 
 
Their father had succumbed to cancer when Ka
therine was only seven, and she had little 
memory of him. Her brother, 
eight years Katherine™s senior
 and only fifteen when their 
father died, had begun his journey toward 
becoming the Solomon pa
triarch much sooner 
than anyone had ever dreamed. As expected, 
though, Peter had grown 
into the role with 
the dignity and strength befitting their fam
ily name. To this day, he still watched over 
Katherine as though they were just kids. 
 
Despite her brother™s occasi
onal prodding, and no shortage of suitors, Katherine had 
never married. Science had become her life partner, and her work had proven more 
fulfilling and exciting than any man could ever hope to be. Katherine had no regrets. 
 
Her field of choiceŠNoetic ScienceŠhad b
een virtually unknown when she first heard 
of it, but in recent years it
 had started opening new doors of understanding into the power 
of the human mind. 
 
Our untapped potential is truly shocking.
 
 
Katherine™s two books on Noetics ha
d established her as a leader
 in this obscure field, but 
her most recent discoveries, when published, promised to make Noetic Science a topic of 
mainstream conversation around the world. 
 
Tonight, however, science was the last th
ing on her mind. Earlier in the day, she had 
received some truly upsetting information relating to her brother. 
I still can™t believe it™s 
true.
 She™d thought of nothi
ng else all afternoon. 
 
A pattering of light rain drum
med on her windshield, and Kath
erine quickly gathered her 
things to get inside. She was about to st
ep out of her car wh
en her cell phone rang. 
 
She checked the caller ID and inhaled deeply. 
 
Then she tucked her hair behind her ea
rs and settled in to take the call. 
 
Six miles away, Mal™akh was moving through th
e corridors of the U.S. Capitol Building 
with a cell phone pressed to his ear. He waited patiently 
as the line rang. 
 
Finally, a woman™s voice answered. ﬁYes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe need to meet again,ﬂ Mal™akh said. 
 
There was a long pause. ﬁI
s everything all right?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI have new information,ﬂ Mal™akh said. 
 
ﬁTell me.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh took a deep breath. ﬁThat which your br
other believes is hidden in D.C. . . . ?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt can be found.ﬂ 
 
Katherine Solomon sounded stunned. ﬁYou™re telling meŠit is 
real
?ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh smiled to himself. ﬁSometimes a lege
nd that endures for centuries . . . endures 
for a reason.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 6 
 
 
 
Is this
 as close as you can get?ﬂ Robert Langdon 
felt a sudden wave of anxiety as his 
driver parked on First Street, a good quart
er mile from the Capitol Building. 
 
ﬁAfraid so,ﬂ the driver said. ﬁHomeland Secu
rity. No vehicles near landmark buildings 
anymore. I™m sorry, sir.ﬂ 
 
Langdon checked his watch, startled to see it 
was already 6:50. A construction zone 
around the National Mall had slowed them dow
n, and his lecture wa
s to begin in ten 
minutes. 
 
ﬁWeather™s turning,ﬂ the driver said, hoppi
ng out and opening La
ngdon™s door for him. 
ﬁYou™ll want to hurry.ﬂ Langdon reached for hi
s wallet to tip the driver, but the man 
waved him off. ﬁYour host already added 
a very generous tip to the charge.ﬂ 
 
Typical Peter,
 Langdon thought, gathering his things
. ﬁOkay, thanks for the ride.ﬂ 
 
The first few raindrops began to fall as La
ngdon reached the top of the gracefully arched 
concourse that descended to the ne
w ﬁundergroundﬂ visitors™ entrance. 
 
The Capitol Visitor Center had been a costly
 and controversial project. Described as an 
underground city to rival parts of Disney
 World, this subterranean space reportedly 
provided over a half-million square feet of 
space for exhibits, restaurants, and meeting 
halls. 
 
Langdon had been looking forward to seeing it, 
although he hadn™t antic
ipated quite this 
long a walk. The skies were threatening to ope
n at any moment, and he broke into a jog, 
his loafers offering almost no traction on the wet cement. 
I dressed for a lecture, not a 
four-hundred-yard downhill dash through the rain!
 
 
When he arrived at the bottom, he was br
eathless and panting. Langdon pushed through 
the revolving door, taking a moment in the 
foyer to catch his breath and brush off the 
rain. As he did, he raised his eyes to
 the newly completed space before him. 
 
Okay, I™m impressed.
 
 
The Capitol Visitor Center was not at all wh
at he had expected. Because the space was 
underground, Langdon had been apprehensi
ve about passing through it. A childhood 
accident had left him stranded at the botto
m of a deep well overnight, and Langdon now 
lived with an almost crippling aversion to enclosed spaces. But this underground space 
was . . . airy somehow. 
Light. Spacious.
 
 
The ceiling was a vast expanse of glass with a se
ries of dramatic light
 fixtures that threw 
a muted glow across the pearl-colored interior finishes. 
 
Normally, Langdon would have taken a full hour in
 here to admire the architecture, but 
with five minutes until showtime, he put his 
head down and dashed through the main hall 
toward the security checkpoint and escalators. 
Relax,
 he told himself. 
Peter knows you™re 
on your way. The event won™t start without you.
 
 
At the security point, a young Hispanic gua
rd chatted with him while Langdon emptied 
his pockets and removed his vintage watch. 
 
ﬁMickey Mouse?ﬂ the guard said, sounding mildly amused. 
 
Langdon nodded, accustomed to the comments. Th
e collector™s edition Mickey Mouse 
watch had been a gift from his parents on his 
ninth birthday. ﬁI wear it to remind me to 
slow down and take life less seriously.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t think it™s work
ing,ﬂ the guard said with a sm
ile. ﬁYou look like you™re in a 
serious hurry.ﬂ 
 
Langdon smiled and put his daybag through the 
X-ray machine. ﬁWhich way to the 
Statuary Hall?ﬂ 
 
The guard motioned toward the es
calators. ﬁYou™ll see the signs.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThanks.ﬂ Langdon grabbed his bag off the conveyor and hurried on. 
 
As the escalator ascended, Langdon took a deep 
breath and tried to 
gather his thoughts. 
He gazed up through the rain-speckled gla
ss ceiling at the mountainous form of the 
illuminated Capitol Dome overhead. It was an
 astonishing building. High atop her roof, 
almost three hundred feet in the air, the St
atue of Freedom peered out into the misty 
darkness like a ghostly sentinel. Langdon alwa
ys found it ironic that the workers who 
hoisted each piece of the nineteen-and-a-hal
f-foot bronze statue to her perch were 
slavesŠa Capitol secret that seldom made 
the syllabi of high school history classes. 
 
This entire building, in fact, was a treasure tr
ove of bizarre arcana th
at included a ﬁkiller 
bathtubﬂ responsible for the pneumonic 
murder of Vice President Henry Wilson, a 
staircase with a permanent bloodstain over wh
ich an inordinate number of guests seemed 
to trip, and a sealed basement chamber in
 which workers in 1930 discovered General 
John Alexander Logan™s long-
deceased stuffed horse. 
 
No legends were as enduring, however, as the 
claims of thirteen different ghosts that 
haunted this building. The spirit 
of city designer Pierre L™En
fant frequently was reported 
wandering the halls, seeking payment of hi
s bill, now two hundred years overdue. The 
ghost of a worker who fell from the Cap
itol Dome during construction was seen 
wandering the corridors with a tray of tools.
 And, of course, the most famous apparition 
of all, reported numerous times in the Ca
pitol basementŠan ephemeral black cat that 
prowled the substructure™s
 eerie maze of narrow passageways and cubicles. 
 
Langdon stepped off the escalator 
and again checked his watch. 
Three minutes.
 He 
hurried down the wide corridor, following 
the signs toward the Statuary Hall and 
rehearsing his opening remarks in his head. La
ngdon had to admit that Peter™s assistant 
had been correct; this lecture topic would 
be a perfect match fo
r an event hosted in 
Washington, D.C., by a prominent Mason. 
 
It was no secret that D.C. had a rich Mas
onic history. The cornerstone of this very 
building had been laid in a full Masonic ritu
al by George Washington himself. This city 
had been conceived and designed by Ma
ster MasonsŠGeorge Washington, Ben 
Franklin, and Pierre L™EnfantŠpowerful mi
nds who adorned their new capital with 
Masonic symbolism, architecture, and art. 
 
Of course, people see in those sy
mbols all kinds of crazy ideas.
 
 
Many conspiracy theorists claimed the Ma
sonic forefathers had concealed powerful 
secrets throughout Washington along with symbo
lic messages hidden in 
the city™s layout 
of streets. Langdon never paid any attenti
on. Misinformation about the Masons was so 
commonplace that even educated Harvard stude
nts seemed to have surprisingly warped 
conceptions about the brotherhood. 
 
Last year, a freshman had rushed wild-eye
d into Langdon™s classroom with a printout 
from the Web. It was a street map of D.C. 
on which certain streets had been highlighted 
to form various shapesŠsatanic pentacles, 
a Masonic compass and square, the head of 
BaphometŠproof apparently 
that the Masons who designed Washington, D.C., were 
involved in some kind of da
rk, mystical conspiracy. 
 
ﬁFun,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁbut hardly convincing. 
If you draw enough intersecting lines on a 
map, you™re bound to find all kinds of shapes.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut this can™t be coinci
dence!ﬂ the kid exclaimed. 
 
Langdon patiently showed the student that the 
same exact shapes could be formed on a 
street map of Detroit. 
 
The kid seemed sorely disappointed. 
 
ﬁDon™t be disheartened,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁWashington 
does
 have some incredible secrets . 
. . just none on this street map.ﬂ 
 
The young man perked up. ﬁSecrets? Like what?ﬂ 
 
ﬁEvery spring I teach a course called Occult Sy
mbols. I talk a lot about D.C. You should 
take the course.ﬂ  
 
ﬁ
Occult
 symbols!ﬂ The freshman looked excited again. ﬁSo there 
are
 devil symbols in 
D.C.!ﬂ 
 
Langdon smiled. ﬁSorry, but the word 
occult,
 despite conjuring images of devil worship, 
actually means ‚hidden™ or ‚obscured.™ In ti
mes of religious oppr
ession, knowledge that 
was counterdoctrinal had to be kept hidde
n or ‚occult,™ and because the church felt 
threatened by this, they redefined anything ‚o
ccult™ as evil, and the prejudice survived.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh.ﬂ The kid slumped. 
 
Nonetheless, that spring, Langdon spotted the fr
eshman seated in the front row as five 
hundred students bustled into Harvard™s Sande
rs Theatre, a hollow old lecture hall with 
creaking wooden benches. 
 
ﬁGood morning, everybody,ﬂ Langdon shouted from th
e expansive stage. He turned on a 
slide projector, and an image materialized 
behind him. ﬁAs you™re
 getting settled, how 
many of you recognize the building in this picture?ﬂ 
 
ﬁU.S. Capitol!ﬂ dozens of
 voices called out in unison. ﬁWashington, D.C.!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes. There are nine million pounds of ironwork 
in that dome. An unparalleled feat of 
architectural ingenuity for the 1850s.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAwesome!ﬂ somebody shouted. 
 
Langdon rolled his eyes, wishing somebody wo
uld ban that word. ﬁOkay, and how many 
of you have ever been to Washington?ﬂ 
 
A scattering of hands went up. 
 
ﬁSo few?ﬂ Langdon feigned surprise. ﬁAnd how ma
ny of you have been to Rome, Paris, 
Madrid, or London?ﬂ 
 
Almost all the hands in the room went up. 
 
As usual.
 One of the rites of passage for Amer
ican college kids was a summer with a 
Eurorail ticket before the hars
h reality of real life set i
n. ﬁIt appears many more of you 
have visited Europe than have visited 
your own capital. Why do you think that is?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo drinking age in Europe!ﬂ someone in back shouted. 
 
Langdon smiled. ﬁAs if the drinking age 
here
 stops any of you?ﬂ 
 
Everyone laughed. 
 
It was the first day of school, and the stude
nts were taking longer than usual to get 
settled, shifting and creaking 
in their wooden pews. Langdon l
oved teaching in this hall 
because he always knew how engaged the studen
ts were simply by listening to how much 
they fidgeted in their pews. 
 
ﬁSeriously,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁWashington, D.C
., has some of the world™s finest 
architecture, art, and symbolism. Why w
ould you go overseas before visiting your own 
capital?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAncient stuff is cooler,ﬂ someone said. 
 
ﬁAnd by ancient stuff,ﬂ Langdon clarified, ﬁI as
sume you mean castles, crypts, temples, 
that sort of thing?ﬂ 
 
Their heads nodded in unison. 
 
ﬁOkay. Now, what if I told 
you that Washington, D.C., has 
every
 one of those things? 
Castles, crypts, pyramids, temples . . . it™s all there.ﬂ 
 
The creaking diminished. 
 
ﬁMy friends,ﬂ Langdon said, lowering his voice 
and moving to the front of the stage, ﬁin 
the next hour, you will discover that our na
tion is overflowing with secrets and hidden 
history. And exactly as in Europe, all of th
e best secrets are hi
dden in plain view.ﬂ 
 
The wooden pews fell dead silent. 
 
Gotcha.
 
 
Langdon dimmed the lights and called up his 
second slide. ﬁWho can tell me what 
George Washington is doing here?ﬂ 
 
The slide was a famous mural depicting Ge
orge Washington dressed in full Masonic 
regalia standing before an odd-looking contra
ptionŠa giant wooden tr
ipod that supported 
a rope-and-pulley system from which was su
spended a massive block of stone. A group 
of well-dressed onlookers stood around him. 
 
ﬁLifting that big block of stone?ﬂ someone ventured. 
 
Langdon said nothing, preferring that a stud
ent make the correction if possible. 
 
ﬁActually,ﬂ another student o
ffered, ﬁI think Washington is 
lowering
 the rock. He™s 
wearing a Masonic costume. I™ve seen pictures of Masons laying cornerstones before. 
The ceremony always uses that tripod
 thing to lower the first stone.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExcellent,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁThe mural portrays 
the Father of Our Country using a tripod 
and pulley to lay the cornerstone of 
our Capitol Building on September 18, 1793, 
between the hours of eleven fifteen and tw
elve thirty.ﬂ Langdon paused, scanning the 
class. ﬁCan anyone tell me the signi
ficance of that date and time?ﬂ 
 
Silence. 
 
ﬁWhat if I told you that precise moment was chosen by three famous MasonsŠGeorge 
Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Pierre 
L™Enfant, the primary architect for D.C.?ﬂ 
 
More silence. 
 
ﬁQuite simply, the cornerstone was set at th
at date and time because, among other things, 
the auspicious Caput Draconis was in Virgo.ﬂ 
 
Everyone exchanged odd looks. 
 
ﬁHold on,ﬂ someone said. ﬁYou mean . . . like 
astrology
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. Although a different astrology than we know today.ﬂ 
 
A hand went up. ﬁYou mean our Founding 
Fathers believed in astrology?ﬂ 
 
Langdon grinned. ﬁBig-time. What would you say 
if I told you the 
city of Washington, 
D.C., has more astrological signs in its architecture than 
any
 other city in the worldŠ
zodiacs, star charts, cornerstone
s laid at precise astrological dates and times? More than 
half of the framers of our Constitution were
 Masons, men who strongly believed that the 
stars and fate were intertwined, men who paid 
close attention to the layout of the heavens 
as they structured their new world.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut that whole thing about 
the Capitol cornerstone being laid while Caput Draconis was 
in VirgoŠwho cares? Can™t that
 just be coincidence?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAn impressive coincidence cons
idering that the cornerstones of
 the three structures that 
make up Federal TriangleŠthe Capitol, th
e White House, the Washington MonumentŠ
were all laid in different years but we
re carefully timed to occur under this 
exact
 same 
astrological condition.ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s gaze was met by a room full of wide 
eyes. A number of heads dipped down as 
students began taking notes. 
 
A hand in back went up. ﬁWhy did they do that?ﬂ 
 
Langdon chuckled. ﬁThe answer to that is an
 entire semester™s worth of material. If 
you™re curious, you should take my mysticism course. Frankly, I don™t think you guys are 
emotionally prepared to hear the answer.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ the person shouted. ﬁTry us!ﬂ 
 
Langdon made a show of considering it and 
then shook his head, toying with them. 
ﬁSorry, I can™t do that. Some of you are onl
y freshmen. I™m afraid it might blow your 
minds.ﬂ 
 
ﬁTell us!ﬂ everyone shouted. 
 
Langdon shrugged. ﬁPerhaps you should join the Ma
sons or Eastern St
ar and learn about 
it from the source.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe can™t get in,ﬂ a young man argued. ﬁThe 
Masons are like a supersecret society!ﬂ 
 
ﬁSupersecret? Really?ﬂ Langdon remembered the 
large Masonic ring that his friend Peter 
Solomon wore proudly on his right hand. ﬁT
hen why do Masons wear obvious Masonic 
rings, tie clips, or pins? Why are Masoni
c buildings clearly ma
rked? Why are their 
meeting times in the newspaper?ﬂ Langdon smiled 
at all the puzzled f
aces. ﬁMy friends, 
the Masons are not a secret
 society . . . they are a society with secrets.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSame thing,ﬂ someone muttered. 
 
ﬁIs it?ﬂ Langdon challenged. ﬁWould you consid
er Coca-Cola a secret society?ﬂ  
 
ﬁOf course not,ﬂ the student said.  
 
ﬁWell, what if you knocked on the door of 
corporate headquarters and asked for the 
recipe for Classic Coke?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThey™d never tell you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. In order to learn Coca-Cola™s d
eepest secret, you would need to join the 
company, work for many years, prove you were 
trustworthy, and even
tually rise to the 
upper echelons of the company, where that in
formation might be shared with you. Then 
you would be sworn to secrecy.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo you™re saying Freemasonry is like a corporation?ﬂ ﬁOnly insofar as they have a strict 
hierarchy and they take 
secrecy very seriously.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMy uncle is a Mason,ﬂ a young woman piped 
up. ﬁAnd my aunt hates it because he 
won™t talk about it with her. She says Ma
sonry is some kind of strange religion.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA common misperception.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s not a religion?ﬂ 
 
ﬁGive it the litmus test,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁWho 
here has taken Professor Witherspoon™s 
comparative religion course?ﬂ  
 
Several hands went up.  
 
ﬁGood. So tell me, what are the three prerequi
sites for an ideology to be considered a 
religion?ﬂ 
 
ﬁABC,ﬂ one woman offered. ﬁAssure, Believe, Convert.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCorrect,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁReligions 
assure
 salvation; religions 
believe
 in a precise 
theology; and religions 
convert
 nonbelievers.ﬂ He paused. ﬁMasonry, however, is batting 
zero for three. Masons make no promises of 
salvation; they have 
no specific theology; 
and they do not seek to convert you. In fact
, within Masonic lodge
s, discussions of 
religion are prohibited.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo . . . Masonry is 
anti
 religious?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOn the contrary. One of the prerequis
ites for becoming a Mason is that you 
must
 believe 
in a higher power. The difference between Maso
nic spirituality and organized religion is 
that the Masons do not impose a specific de
finition or name on a higher power. Rather 
than definitive theological 
identities like God, Allah, Buddha, 
or Jesus, the Masons use 
more general terms like Supreme Being or Grea
t Architect of the Universe. This enables 
Masons of different faiths to gather together.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSounds a little far-out,ﬂ someone said. 
 
ﬁOr, perhaps, refreshingly open-minded?ﬂ La
ngdon offered. ﬁIn this age when different 
cultures are killing each other over whose defi
nition of God is bette
r, one could say the 
Masonic tradition of tolerance and open-mindedness is commendable.ﬂ Langdon paced 
the stage. 
ﬁ
Moreover, Masonry is open to men of 
all races, colors, and creeds, and 
provides a spiritual frater
nity that does not discriminate in any way.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDoesn™t discriminate?ﬂ A member of th
e university™s Women™s Center stood up. ﬁHow 
many 
women
 are permitted to be Masons, Professor Langdon?ﬂ 
 
Langdon showed his palms in surrender. ﬁA 
fair point. Freemas
onry had its roots, 
traditionally, in the stone masons™ guilds of Europe and was therefore a man™s 
organization. Several hundred years ago, so
me say as early as 1703, a women™s branch 
called Eastern Star was founded. They have more than a million members.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNonetheless,ﬂ the woman said, ﬁMasonry is 
a powerful organization from which women 
are excluded.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was not sure how 
powerful
 the Masons really were anymore, and he was not 
going to go down that road; per
ceptions of the modern Maso
ns ranged from their being a 
group of harmless old men who liked to play 
dress-up . . . all the way to an underground 
cabal of power brokers who ran the world. 
The truth, no doubt, was somewhere in the 
middle. 
 
ﬁProfessor Langdon,ﬂ called a young man with curly 
hair in the back row, ﬁif Masonry is 
not a secret society, not 
a corporation, and not a religion, then what is it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, if you were to ask a Mason, he would 
offer the following definition: Masonry is a 
system of morality, ve
iled in allegory and illustrated by symbols.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSounds to me like a euphemism for ‚freaky cult.™ ﬂ 
 
ﬁ
Freaky,
 you say?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHell yes!ﬂ the kid said, standi
ng up. ﬁI heard what they do in
side those secret buildings! 
Weird candlelight rituals with coffins, and noos
es, and drinking wine out of skulls. Now 
that™s
 freaky!ﬂ 
 
Langdon scanned the class. ﬁDoes that
 sound freaky to anyone else?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes!ﬂ they all chimed in. 
 
Langdon feigned a sad sigh. ﬁToo bad. If that
™s too freaky for you, then I know you™ll 
never want to join 
my
 cult.ﬂ 
 
Silence settled over the room. The student 
from the Women™s Center looked uneasy. 
ﬁ
You™re
 in a cult?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded and lowered his voice to a conspi
ratorial whisper. 
ﬁDon™t tell anyone, 
but on the pagan day of the sun god Ra, I kneel 
at the foot of an an
cient instrument of 
torture and consume ritualistic symbols of blood and flesh.ﬂ 
 
The class looked horrified. 
 
Langdon shrugged. ﬁAnd if any of you care to jo
in me, come to the Harvard chapel on 
Sunday, kneel beneath the crucif
ix, and take Holy Communion.ﬂ 
 
The classroom remained silent. 
 
Langdon winked. ﬁOpen your minds, my frie
nds. We all fear what we do not 
understand.ﬂ 
 
 
The tolling of a clock began echoi
ng through the Ca
pitol corridors. 
 
Seven o™clock.
 
 
Robert Langdon was now running. 
Talk about a dramatic entrance.
 Passing through the 
House Connecting Corridor, he spotted the 
entrance to the National Statuary Hall and 
headed straight for it. 
 
As he neared the door, he slowed to a noncha
lant stroll and took se
veral deep breaths. 
Buttoning his jacket, he lifted his chin ever so
 slightly and turned the corner just as the 
final chime sounded. 
 
Showtime.
 
 
As Professor Robert Langdon str
ode into the National Statuary
 Hall, he raised his eyes 
and smiled warmly. An instant la
ter, his smile evaporated. He stopped dead in his tracks. 
 
Something was very, very wrong. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 7 
 
 
 
Katherine Solomon
 hurried across the parking lot thr
ough the cold rain, wishing she had 
worn more than jeans and a cashmere sweat
er. As she neared the building™s main 
entrance, the roar of the giant air purifiers go
t louder. She barely heard them, her ears still 
ringing from the phone call she™d just received. 
 
That which your brother believes is 
hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found.
 
 
Katherine found the notion almost impossible 
to believe. She and the caller still had 
much to discuss and had agreed 
to do so later that evening. 
 
Reaching the main doors, she felt the same sense of excitement she always felt upon 
entering the gargantuan building. 
Nobody knows this place is here.
 
 
The sign on the door announced: 
SMITHSONIAN MUSEUM
 
 
SUPPORT CENTER
 
 
(SMSC)
 
 
The Smithsonian Institution, despite having 
more than a dozen massive museums on the 
National Mall, had a collection so
 huge that only 2 percent of
 it could be on display at 
any one time. The other 98 percent of the co
llection had to be stored somewhere. And 
that somewhere . . . was 
here
. 
 
Not surprisingly, this building was home to an
 astonishingly divers
e array of artifactsŠ
giant Buddhas, handwritten codices, poisoned 
darts from New Guinea, jewel-encrusted 
knives, a kayak made of baleen. Equally mind-boggling were the building™s 
natural
 
treasuresŠplesiosaur skeletons, a priceless meteorite 
collection, a giant squid, even a 
collection of elephant skulls brought back fr
om an African safari by Teddy Roosevelt. 
 
But none of this was why the Smithsonian 
secretary, Peter Solomon, had introduced his 
sister to the SMSC three years ago. He
 had brought her to this place not to 
behold
 
scientific marvels, but rather to 
create
 them. And that was exactly what Katherine had 
been doing. 
 
Deep within this building, in the darkness 
of the most remote recesses, was a small 
scientific laboratory unlike any other in the world. The recent breakthroughs Katherine 
had made here in the field of Noetic Scie
nce had ramifications across every disciplineŠ
from physics, to history, to philosophy, to religion. 
Soon everything will change,
 she 
thought. 
 
As Katherine entered the lobby, the front de
sk guard quickly stashed his radio and 
yanked the earplugs from his ears. ﬁMs. Solomon!ﬂ He smiled broadly. 
 
ﬁRedskins?ﬂ 
 
He blushed, looking guilty. ﬁPregame.ﬂ 
 
She smiled. ﬁI won™t tell.ﬂ She walked to the metal detector and emptied her pockets. 
When she slid the gold Cartier watch from 
her wrist, she felt the usual pang of sadness. 
The timepiece had been a gift from her mo
ther for Katherine™s eighteenth birthday. 
Almost ten years had now passed since her moth
er had died violently . . . passing away in 
Katherine™s arms. 
 
ﬁSo, Ms. Solomon?ﬂ the guard whispere
d jokingly. ﬁAre you ever gonna tell anybody 
what you™re doing back there?ﬂ 
 
She glanced up. ﬁSomeday, Kyle. Not tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCome on,ﬂ he pressed. ﬁA secret lab . . 
. in a secret museum? You must be doing 
something cool.ﬂ 
 
Miles beyond cool,
 Katherine thought as sh
e collected her things
. The truth was that 
Katherine was doing science so advanced th
at it no longer even resembled science. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 8 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 stood frozen in the doorway of the 
National Statuary 
Hall and studied 
the startling scene before him. The room wa
s precisely as he remembered itŠa balanced 
semicircle built in the style of a Greek amphitheater. The graceful arched walls of 
sandstone and Italian plaste
r were punctuated by colu
mns of variegated breccia, 
interspersed with the nation™s statuary colle
ctionŠlife-size statues of thirty-eight great 
Americans standing in a semicircle on a st
ark expanse of black-and-white marble tile. 
 
It was exactly as Langdon had recalled from the lecture he had once attended here. 
 
Except for one thing. 
 
Tonight, the room was empty. 
 
No chairs. No audience. No Peter Solom
on. Just a handful of tourists milling around 
aimlessly, oblivious to Langdon™s grand entrance. 
Did Peter mean the Rotunda?
 He 
peered down the south corridor toward the Rotunda and could see tourists milling around 
in there, too. 
 
The echoes of the clock chime had fade
d. Langdon was now officially late.  
 
He hurried back into the ha
llway and found a docent. ﬁExcuse me, the lecture for the 
Smithsonian event tonight? Where is that being held?ﬂ 
 
The docent hesitated. ﬁI™m not sure, sir. When does it start?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNow!ﬂ 
 
The man shook his head. ﬁI don™t know about 
any Smithsonian even
t this eveningŠnot 
here, at least.ﬂ 
 
Bewildered, Langdon hurried back toward the 
center of the room, s
canning the entire 
space. 
Is Solomon playing some kind of joke?
 Langdon couldn™t imagine it. He pulled out 
his cell phone and the fax page from this
 morning and dialed Peter™s number. 
 
His phone took a moment to locate a signal 
inside the enormous building. Finally, it 
began to ring. 
 
The familiar southern accent answered. ﬁPeter
 Solomon™s office, this is Anthony. May I 
help you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnthony!ﬂ Langdon said with relief. ﬁI™m glad
 you™re still there. This is Robert 
Langdon. There seems to be some confusion 
about the lecture. I™m standing in the 
Statuary Hall, but there™s nobody here. Has the 
lecture been moved to a different room?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t believe so, sir. Let me check.ﬂ His 
assistant paused a moment. ﬁDid you confirm 
with Mr. Solomon directly?ﬂ 
 
Langdon was confused. ﬁNo, I confirmed with 
you,
 Anthony. This morning!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, I recall that.ﬂ There was a silence on 
the line. ﬁThat was a bit careless of you, don™t 
you think, Professor?ﬂ 
 
Langdon was now fully alert. ﬁI beg your pardon?ﬂ 
 
ﬁConsider this . . .ﬂ the man said. ﬁYou r
eceived a fax asking you to call a number, which 
you did. You spoke to a total st
ranger who said he was Peter Solomon™s assistant. Then 
you willingly boarded a private plane to Wash
ington and climbed into a waiting car. Is 
that right?ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt a chill race through his body. ﬁWho 
the hell is this? Where is Peter?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m afraid Peter Solomon has no idea you™re 
in Washington today.ﬂ The man™s southern 
accent disappeared, and his voice morphed into
 a deeper, mellifluous
 whisper. ﬁYou are 
here, Mr. Langdon, because 
I
 want you here.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 9 
 
 
 
Inside the
 Statuary Hall, Robert Langdon clutched his cell phone 
to his ear and paced in 
a tight circle. ﬁWho the hell are you?ﬂ 
 
The man™s reply was a silky calm whisper. ﬁD
o not be alarmed, Professor. You have been 
summoned here for a reason.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSummoned?ﬂ Langdon felt like a cage
d animal. ﬁTry kidnapped!ﬂ 
 
ﬁHardly.ﬂ The man™s voice was eerily serene
. ﬁIf I wanted to ha
rm you, you would be 
dead in your Town Car right now.ﬂ He let 
the words hang for a moment. ﬁMy intentions 
are purely noble, I assure you. I would si
mply like to offer you an invitation.ﬂ 
 
No thanks.
 Ever since his experiences in Europe
 over the last several years, Langdon™s 
unwanted celebrity had made him a magnet for 
nut-cases, and this one had just crossed a 
very serious line. ﬁLook, I don™t know what 
the hell is going on here, but I™m hanging 
upŠﬂ 
 
ﬁUnwise,ﬂ said the man. ﬁYour window of opport
unity is very small if you want to save 
Peter Solomon™s soul.ﬂ 
 
Langdon drew a sharp breath. ﬁWhat did you say?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sure you heard me.ﬂ 
 
The way this man had uttered Peter™s name had stopped Langdon cold. ﬁWhat do you 
know about Peter?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAt this point, I know his d
eepest secrets. Mr. Solomon is
 my guest, and I can be a 
persuasive host.ﬂ 
 
This can™t be happening.
 ﬁYou don™t have Peter.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI answered his private cell phone
. That should give you pause.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m calling the police.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo need,ﬂ the man said. ﬁThe aut
horities will join you momentarily.ﬂ 
 
What is this l
unatic talking about?
 Langdon™s tone hardened. ﬁIf you have Peter, put him 
on the phone right now.ﬂ ﬁ 
 
ﬁThat™s impossible. Mr. Solomon is trapped 
in an unfortunate place.ﬂ The man paused. 
ﬁHe is in the Araf.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere?ﬂ
 Langdon realized he was clutching his phone
 so tightly his fingers were going 
numb. 
 
ﬁThe Araf? Hamistagan? That place to wh
ich Dante devoted the canticle immediately 
following his legendary 
Inferno
?ﬂ 
 
The man™s religious and literary references solidified Langdon™s suspicion that he was 
dealing with a madman. 
The second canticle.
 Langdon knew it well; nobody escaped 
Phillips Exeter Academy without reading Dante. ﬁYou™re saying you think Peter 
Solomon is . . . in 
purgatory
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁA crude word you Christians use, but yes, Mr. Solomon is in the 
in-between
.ﬂ 
 
The man™s words hung in Langdon™s ear. 
ﬁAre you saying Peter is . . . 
dead
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot exactly, no.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot exactly?!ﬂ Langdon yelled, his voice echoi
ng sharply in the hall. A family of 
tourists looked over at him. He turned away and lowered his voice. ﬁ
Death
 is usually an 
all-or-nothing thing!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou surprise me, Professor. I expected 
you to have a better understanding of the 
mysteries of life and death. There 
is
 a world in betweenŠa world in which Peter 
Solomon is hovering at the moment. He can eith
er return to your world, or he can move 
on to the next . . . depending on your actions right now.ﬂ 
 
Langdon tried to process this. ﬁWhat do you want from me?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s simple. You have been given access to
 something quite ancient. And tonight, you 
will share it with me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI have no idea what yo
u™re talking about.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo? You pretend not to understa
nd the ancient secrets that ha
ve been entrusted to you?ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt a sudden sinking sensation, now gue
ssing what this was probably about. 
Ancient secrets.
 He had not uttered a word to any
one about his experiences in Paris 
several years earlier, but Grail fanatics had 
followed the media coverage closely, some 
connecting the dots and believing Langdon wa
s now privy to secret information 
regarding the Holy Grail
Šperhaps even its location. 
 
ﬁLook,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁif this is about the Ho
ly Grail, I can assure you I know nothing 
more thanŠﬂ 
 
ﬁDon™t insult my intelligence, Mr. Langdon,ﬂ th
e man snapped. ﬁI have no interest in 
anything so frivolous as the Ho
ly Grail or mankind™s pathetic debate over whose version 
of history is correct. Circular
 arguments over the semantics of faith hold no interest for 
me. Those are questions answ
ered only through death.ﬂ 
 
The stark words left Langdon confused. 
ﬁThen what the hell is this about?ﬂ 
 
The man paused for several seconds. ﬁAs you ma
y know, there exists within this city an 
ancient portal.ﬂ 
 
An ancient portal?
 
 
ﬁAnd tonight, Professor, you will unlock it 
for me. You should be honored I contacted 
youŠthis is the invitation of
 your lifetime. You alone have been chosen.ﬂ 
 
And you have lost your mind.
 ﬁI™m sorry, but you™ve chos
en poorly,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁI 
don™t know anything about any ancient portal.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou don™t understand, Professor. It was not 
I
 who chose you . . . it was 
Peter Solomon
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ Langdon replied, his voi
ce barely a whisper. 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon told me how to find the portal, and he confessed to me that only one man 
on earth could unlock it. A
nd he said that man is 
you
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIf Peter said that, he was mistaken . . . or lying.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI think not. He was in a fragile state when he
 confessed that fact, and I am inclined to 
believe him.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt a stab of anger. ﬁI™m wa
rning you, if you hurt Peter in anyŠﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s far too late for 
that,
ﬂ the man said in an amused tone. ﬁI™ve already taken what I 
need from Peter Solomon. But for his sake, I suggest you provide what I need from 
you.
 
Time is of the essence . . . for 
both
 of you. I suggest you find the portal and unlock it. 
Peter will point the way.ﬂ 
 
Peter?
 ﬁI thought you said Pete
r was in ‚purgatory.™ﬂ 
 
ﬁAs above, so below,ﬂ the man said. 
 
Langdon felt a deepening chill. Th
is strange response was an an
cient Hermetic adage that 
proclaimed a belief in 
the physical connection be
tween heaven and earth. 
As above, so 
below.
 Langdon eyed the vast room and wondered how everything had veered so 
suddenly out of control tonight
. ﬁLook, I don™t know how to find any ancient portal. I™m 
calling the police.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt really hasn™t dawned on you ye
t, has it? Why you were chosen?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁIt 
will,
ﬂ he replied, chuckling. ﬁAny moment now.ﬂ 
 
Then the line went dead. 
 
Langdon stood rigid for several 
terrifying moments, trying to process what had just 
happened. 
 
Suddenly, in the distance, he
 heard an unexpected sound. 
 
It was coming from the Rotunda. 
 
Someone was screaming. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 10 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 had entered the Capitol Rotunda many 
times in his life, but never at a 
full sprint. As he ran through th
e north entrance, he spotted 
a group of tourists clustered 
in the center of the room. A small boy was 
screaming, and his parents were trying to 
console him. Others were crowding around, a
nd several security gua
rds were doing their 
best to restore order. 
 
ﬁHe pulled it out of his sling,ﬂ so
meone said frantically, ﬁand just 
left
 it there!ﬂ 
 
As Langdon drew nearer, he got his first g
limpse of what was causing all the commotion. 
Admittedly, the object on the Capitol floor 
was odd, but its presence hardly warranted 
screaming. 
 
The device on the floor was one Langdon ha
d seen many times. The Harvard art 
department had dozens of theseŠlife-size plas
tic models used by sculptors and painters 
to help them render the human body™s most co
mplex feature, which, surprisingly, was not 
the human face but rather the human hand. 
Someone left a mannequin hand in the 
Rotunda?
 
 
Mannequin hands, or 
handequins
 as some called them, had articulated fingers enabling an 
artist to pose the hand in whatever positi
on he wanted, which for sophomoric college 
students was often with the middle finger extended
 straight up in the air. This handequin, 
however, had been positioned with its index finger and thumb pointing up toward the 
ceiling. 
 
As Langdon drew nearer, though, he realized 
this handequin was unusual. Its plastic 
surface was not smooth like most. Instead, the 
surface was mottled and slightly wrinkled, 
and appeared almost . . . 
 
Like real skin.
 
 
Langdon stopped abruptly. 
 
Now he saw the blood. 
My God!
 
 
The severed wrist appeared to have been sk
ewered onto a spiked wooden base so that it 
would stand up. A wave of nausea rushed 
over him. Langdon inched closer, unable to 
breathe, seeing now that the tips of the inde
x finger and thumb had been decorated with 
tiny tattoos. The tattoos, however, were not 
what held Langdon™s attention. His gaze 
moved instantly to the familiar golden ring on the fourth finger. 
 
No.
 
 
Langdon recoiled. His world began to spin as he
 realized he was l
ooking at the severed 
right hand of Peter Solomon. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 11 
 
 
 
Why isn™t
 Peter answering?
 Katherine Solomon wondered 
as she hung up her cell phone. 
Where is he?
 
 
For three years, Peter Solomon had always been
 the first to arrive for their weekly seven 
P.M. Sunday-night meetings. It was their privat
e family ritual, a way to remain connected 
before the start of a new week, and for Peter 
to stay up-to-date on Katherine™s work at the 
lab. 
 
He™s never late,
 she thought, 
and he always answers his phone.
 To make matters worse, 
Katherine was still not sure what she was going to say to him when he 
did
 finally arrive. 
How do I even begin to ask him about what I found out today?
 
 
Her footsteps clicked rhythmically down the 
cement corridor that 
ran like a spine through 
the SMSC. Known as ﬁThe Street,ﬂ the corr
idor connected the bu
ilding™s five massive 
storage pods. Forty feet overh
ead, a circulatory system of 
orange ductwork throbbed with 
the heartbeat of the buildingŠthe pulsing sounds 
of thousands of cubic feet of filtered air 
being circulated. 
 
Normally, during her nearly quarter-mile walk
 to her lab, Katherine felt calmed by the 
breathing sounds of the building. Tonight, how
ever, the pulsing had her on edge. What 
she had learned about her brother today w
ould have troubled anyone, and yet because 
Peter was the only family she had in the wo
rld, Katherine felt especially disturbed to 
think he might be keeping secrets from her. 
 
As far as she knew, he had kept a secret from her only 
once . . .
 a wonderful secret that 
was hidden at the end of this
 very hallway. Three years ago, her brother had walked 
Katherine down this corridor, introducing 
her to the SMSC by pr
oudly showing off some 
of the building™s more unusual itemsŠthe Mars meteorite ALH-84001, the handwritten 
pictographic diary of Sitting Bull, a collection 
of wax-sealed Ball jars containing original 
specimens collected by Charles Darwin. 
 
At one point, they walked past a heavy 
door with a small window. Katherine caught a 
glimpse of what lay beyond and gasped. ﬁWhat in the world is 
that
?!ﬂ 
 
Her brother chuckled and kept walking. ﬁPod 
Three. It™s called Wet Pod. Pretty unusual 
sight, isn™t it?ﬂ 
 
Terrifying is more like it.
 Katherine hurried after him. 
This building was like another 
planet
.
 
 
ﬁWhat I really want to show you is in Pod 
Five,ﬂ her brother sai
d, guiding her down the 
seemingly endless corridor. ﬁIt™s our newest 
addition. It was built to
 house artifacts from 
the basement of the National Museum of Natu
ral History. That collection is scheduled for 
relocation here in about five
 years, which means Pod Five is sitting empty at the 
moment.ﬂ 
 
Katherine glanced over. ﬁEmpty? 
So why are we looking at it?ﬂ 
 
Her brother™s gray eyes flashed a familiar mischief. ﬁIt occurred to me that because 
nobody is using the space, maybe 
you
 could use it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMe?ﬂ 
 
ﬁSure. I thought maybe you could use a dedi
cated lab spaceŠa facility where you can 
actually 
perform
 some of the theoretical experiment
s you™ve been developing for all these 
years.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stared at her brother in 
shock. ﬁBut, Peter, those experiments 
are
 theoretical! 
To actually 
perform
 them would be almost impossible.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNothing is impossible, Katherine, and this 
building is perfect fo
r you. The SMSC is not 
just a warehouse of treasures; 
it™s one of the world™s most advanced scientific research 
facilities. We™re constantly taking pieces fr
om the collection and examining them with 
the best quantitative technologies money can
 buy. All the equipment you could possibly 
need would be here at your disposal.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter, the technologies required 
to run these experiments areŠﬂ 
 
ﬁAlready in place.ﬂ He smiled 
broadly. ﬁThe lab is done.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stopped short. 
 
Her brother pointed down the long corri
dor. ﬁWe™re going to see it now.ﬂ 
 
Katherine could barely speak. ﬁYou . . . you built me a lab?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s my job. The Smithsonian was establis
hed to advance scientific knowledge. As 
secretary, I must take that 
charge seriously. I believe the experiments you™ve proposed 
have the potential to push th
e boundaries of science into 
uncharted territory.ﬂ Peter 
stopped and looked her squarely in the eyes. ﬁW
hether or not you were my sister, I would 
feel obliged to support this re
search. Your ideas are brillian
t. The world deserves to see 
where they lead.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter, I can™t possiblyŠﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay, relax . . . it was my own money, a
nd nobody™s using Pod Five right now. When 
you™re done with your experiments, you™ll move
 out. Besides, Pod Five has some unique 
properties that will be 
perfect for your work.ﬂ 
 
Katherine could not imagine what a massive, 
empty pod might offer that would serve her 
research, but she sensed she was about to fi
nd out. They had just reached a steel door 
with boldly stenciled letters: 
POD 5
 
 
 
Her brother inserted his key car
d into a slot and an electron
ic keypad lit up. He raised his 
finger to type his access code, but paused, ar
ching his eyebrows in 
the same mischievous 
way he always had as a boy. ﬁYou sure you™re ready?ﬂ 
 
She nodded. 
My brother, always the showman.
 
 
ﬁStand back.ﬂ Peter hit the keys. 
 
The steel door hissed loudly open. 
 
Beyond the threshold was only inky blackne
ss . . . a yawning void. A hollow moan 
seemed to echo out of the depths. Katherine fe
lt a cold blast of air emanating from within. 
It was like staring into 
the Grand Canyon at night. 
 
ﬁPicture an empty airline hanga
r waiting for a fleet of Air
buses,ﬂ her brother said, ﬁand 
you get the basic idea.ﬂ 
 
Katherine felt herself take a step backward. 
 
ﬁThe pod itself is far too voluminous to be he
ated, but your lab is a thermally insulated 
cinder-block room, roughly a cube
, located in the farthest co
rner of the pod for maximum 
separation.ﬂ  
 
Katherine tried to picture it. 
A box inside a box.
 She strained to see 
into the darkness, but 
it was absolute. ﬁHow far back?ﬂ  
 
ﬁPretty far . . . a football fi
eld would fit easily in here
. I should warn you, though, the 
walk is a little unnerving. 
It™s exceptionally dark.ﬂ 
 
Katherine peered tentatively around 
the corner. ﬁNo light switch?ﬂ 
 
ﬁPod Five is not yet wi
red for electricity.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut . . . then how can a lab function?ﬂ 
 
He winked. ﬁHydrogen fuel cell.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s jaw dropped. 
ﬁYou™re kidding, right?ﬂ 
 
ﬁEnough clean power to run a small town. 
Your lab enjoys full radio-frequency 
separation from the rest of the building. What™s
 more, all pod exteriors are sealed with 
photo-resistant membranes to protect the artif
acts inside from solar radiation. Essentially, 
this pod is a sealed, energy-neutral environment.ﬂ 
 
Katherine was starting to comprehend the appe
al of Pod 5. Because much of her work 
centered on quantifying previous
ly unknown energy fields, her experiments needed to be 
performed in a location isolated from any ex
traneous radiation or ﬁwhite noise.ﬂ This 
included interference as subtle as ﬁbrain ra
diationﬂ or ﬁthought emissionsﬂ generated by 
people nearby. For this reason, a university 
campus or hospital lab wouldn™t work, but a 
deserted pod at the SMSC could 
not have been more perfect. 
 
ﬁLet™s go back and have a look.ﬂ Her brother 
was grinning as he st
epped into the vast 
darkness. ﬁJust follow me.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stalled at the threshold. 
Over a hundred yards in total darkness?
 She wanted to 
suggest a flashlight, but her brother ha
d already disappeared into the abyss. 
 
ﬁPeter?ﬂ she called.  
 
ﬁLeap of faith,ﬂ he called back, his voi
ce already fading away. ﬁYou™ll find your way. 
Trust me.ﬂ 
 
He™s kidding, right?
 Katherine™s heart was pounding as 
she stepped a few feet over the 
threshold, trying to peer into the darkness. 
I can™t see a thing!
 Suddenly the steel door 
hissed and slammed shut behi
nd her, plunging her into total blackness. Not a speck of 
light anywhere. ﬁPeter?!ﬂ 
 
Silence. 
 
You™ll find your way. Trust me.
 
 
Tentative, she inched forward blindly. 
Leap of faith?
 Katherine could not even see her 
hand directly in front of her face. She ke
pt moving forward, but within a matter of 
seconds, she was entirely lost. 
Where am I going?
 
 
That was three years ago. 
 
Now, as Katherine arrived at the same h
eavy metal door, she realized how far she had 
come since that first night. Her labŠni
cknamed the CubeŠhad become her home, a 
sanctuary within the depths of Pod 5. Exactly
 as her brother had predicted, she had found 
her way through the darkness that night, and 
every day sinceŠthanks to an ingeniously 
simple guidance system that her brothe
r had let her discover for herself. 
 
Far more important, her brother™s other predic
tion had come true 
as well: Katherine™s 
experiments had produced astonishing results,
 particularly in th
e last six months, 
breakthroughs that would alter entire paradigms of thinki
ng. Katherine and her brother 
had agreed to keep her results absolutely s
ecret until the implications were more fully 
understood. One day soon, however, Katherine kn
ew she would publish some of the most 
transformative scientific re
velations in human history. 
 
A secret lab in a secret museum,
 she thought, inserting her key card into the Pod 5 door. 
The keypad lit up, and Katherine typed her PIN. 
 
The steel door hissed open. 
 
The familiar hollow moan was accompanied by the same blast of cold air. As always, 
Katherine felt her pulse rate start to climb. 
 
Strangest commute on earth
. 
 
Steeling herself for the journey, Katherine So
lomon glanced at her watch as she stepped 
into the void. Tonight, however, a 
troubled thought followed her inside. 
Where is Peter?
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 12 
 
 
 
Capitol police
 chief Trent Anderson had overseen security in the U.S. Capitol Complex 
for over a decade. A burly, square-chested man with a chiseled face and red hair, he kept 
his hair cropped in a buzz cut, giving him an
 air of military authority. He wore a visible 
sidearm as a warning to anyone foolish enough 
to question the extent of his authority. 
 
Anderson spent the majority of
 his time coordinating his sm
all army of police officers 
from a high-tech surveillance center in the ba
sement of the Capitol. Here he oversaw a 
staff of technicians who watched visual m
onitors, computer readouts, and a telephone 
switchboard that kept him in contact with
 the many security personnel he commanded. 
 
This evening had been unusually quiet, 
and Anderson was pleased. He had been hoping 
to catch a bit of the Redskins game on the fl
at-panel television in his office. The game 
had just kicked off when his intercom buzzed. 
 
ﬁChief?ﬂ  
 
Anderson groaned and kept his eyes on the te
levision as he pressed the button. ﬁYeah.ﬂ  
 
ﬁWe™ve got some kind of disturbance in th
e Rotunda. I™ve got officers arriving now, but I 
think you™ll want to have a look.ﬂ  
 
ﬁRight.ﬂ Anderson walked into
 the security nerve centerŠa 
compact, neomodern facility 
packed with computer monito
rs. ﬁWhat have you got?ﬂ  
 
The technician was cueing a digital video cl
ip on his monitor. ﬁRotunda east balcony 
camera. Twenty seconds ago.ﬂ He played the clip. 
 
Anderson watched over the technician™s shoulder. 
 
The Rotunda was almost deserted today, do
tted with just a few tourists. Anderson™s 
trained eye went immediately 
to the one person who was alone
 and moving faster than all 
the others. Shaved head. Green army-surplus j
acket. Injured arm in a sling. Slight limp. 
Slouched posture. Ta
lking on a cell phone. 
 
The bald man™s footfalls echoed crisply on th
e audio feed until, s
uddenly, arriving at the 
exact center of the Rotunda, he stopped shor
t, ended his phone call,
 and then knelt down 
as if to tie his shoe. But instead of tying a 
shoe, he pulled somethi
ng out of his sling and 
set it on the floor. Then he stood up and 
limped briskly toward the east exit. 
 
Anderson eyed the oddly shaped object the man had left behind. 
What in the world?
 It 
was about eight inches tall and standing ve
rtically. Anderson crouc
hed closer to the 
screen and squinted. 
That can™t be what it looks like!
 
 
As the bald man hurried off, disappearing 
through the east portic
o, a little boy nearby 
could be heard saying, ﬁMommy, that man 
dropped something.ﬂ The boy drifted toward 
the object but suddenly stopped short. After a 
long, motionless beat, 
he pointed and let 
out a deafening scream. 
 
Instantly, the police 
chief spun and ran for the door, barki
ng orders as he went. ﬁRadio all 
points! Find the bald guy with th
e sling and detain him! NOW!ﬂ 
 
Dashing out of the security center, he bounde
d up the treads of the well-worn staircase 
three at a time. The security
 feed had shown the bald ma
n with the sling leave the 
Rotunda via the east portico. The shortest rout
e out of the building 
would therefore take 
him through the east-west corr
idor, which was just ahead. 
 
I can head him off.
 
 
As he reached the top of the stairs and rounded the corner, Anderson surveyed the quiet 
hallway before him. An elderly couple stro
lled at the far end, hand in hand. Nearby, a 
blond tourist wearing a blue blazer was 
reading a guidebook and studying the mosaic 
ceiling outside the House chamber. 
 
ﬁExcuse me, sir!ﬂ Anderson barked, running toward him. ﬁHave you seen a bald man 
with a sling on his arm?ﬂ 
 
The man looked up from his book with a confused expression. 
 
ﬁA bald man with a sling!ﬂ Anderson re
peated more firmly. ﬁHave you seen him?ﬂ 
 
The tourist hesitated and glanced nervously to
ward the far eastern end of the hallway. 
ﬁUh . . . yes,ﬂ he said. ﬁI thi
nk he just ran past me . . . to
 that staircase over there.ﬂ He 
pointed down the hall. 
 
Anderson pulled out his radio and yelled into 
it. ﬁAll points! The suspect is headed for 
the southeast exit. Converge!ﬂ 
He stowed the radio and yanked his sidearm from its 
holster, running toward the exit. 
 
Thirty seconds later, at a quiet exit on the east side of the Capitol, the powerfully built 
blond man in the blue blazer stepped into th
e damp night air. He
 smiled, savoring the 
coolness of the evening. 
 
Transformation.
 
 
It had been so easy. 
 
Only a minute ago he had limped quickly out 
of the Rotunda in an army-surplus coat. 
Stepping into a darkened alcove, he shed hi
s coat, revealing the blue blazer he wore 
underneath. Before abandoning his surplus jack
et, he pulled a blond wig from the pocket 
and fit it snugly on his head. Then he 
stood up straight, pulled a slim Washington 
guidebook from his blazer, and stepped calmly from the niche with an elegant gait. 
 
Transformation. This is my gift.
 
 
As Mal™akh™s mortal legs carried him toward
 his waiting limousine, he arched his back, 
standing to his full six-foot-t
hree height and throwing back
 his shoulders. He inhaled 
deeply, letting the air fill his 
lungs. He could feel the wings
 of the tattooed phoenix on his 
chest opening wide. 
 
If they only knew my power,
 he thought, gazing out at the city. 
Tonight my transformation 
will be complete.
 
 
Mal™akh had played his cards artfully within
 the Capitol Building, showing obeisance to 
all the ancient etiquettes. 
The ancient invitation has been delivered.
 If Langdon had not 
yet grasped his role here
 tonight, soon he would. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 13 
 
 
 
For Robert Langdon,
 the Capitol RotundaŠlike St. Pe
ter's BasilicaŠalways had a way 
of taking him by surprise. Intellectually, he knew
 the room was so large that the Statue of 
Liberty could stand comfortably inside it, 
but somehow the Rotunda always felt larger 
and more hallowed than he anticipated, as if
 there were spirits in the air. Tonight, 
however, there was only chaos. 
 
Capitol police officers were sealing the Ro
tunda while attempting to herd distraught 
tourists away from the hand. The little boy 
was still crying. A bri
ght light flashedŠa 
tourist taking a photo of the handŠand several guards immediately detained the man, 
taking his camera and escorting him off. In the confusion, Langdon felt himself moving 
forward in a trance, slipping through th
e crowd, inching cl
oser to the hand. 
 
Peter Solomon's severed right hand was standing
 upright, the flat pl
ane of the detached 
wrist skewered down onto the spike of a sma
ll wooden stand. Three of the fingers were 
closed in a fist, while the thumb and index 
finger were fully extended, pointing up toward 
the soaring dome. 
 
ﬁEveryone back!ﬂ an officer called. 
 
Langdon was close enough now that he could 
see dried blood, which had run down from 
the wrist and coagulated on the wooden base. 
Postmortem wounds don't bleed . . . which 
means Peter is alive.
 Langdon didn't know whether to be relieved or nauseated. 
Peter's 
hand was removed while he was alive?
 Bile rose in his throat. 
He thought of all the times 
his dear friend had extended this same hand 
to shake Langdon's or offer a warm embrace. 
 
For several seconds, Langdon felt his mind 
go blank, like an untuned television set 
broadcasting only static. The first clear imag
e that broke through wa
s utterly unexpected. 
 
A crown . . . and a star.
 
 
Langdon crouched down, eyeing the tips of Peter's thumb and index finger. 
Tattoos?
 
Incredibly, the monster who had done this a
ppeared to have tattooed tiny symbols on 
Peter's fingertips. 
 
On the thumbŠa crown. On the index fingerŠa star. 
 
This can't be.
 The two symbols registered instan
tly in Langdon's mi
nd, amplifying this 
already horrific scene into something almost
 otherworldly. These symbols had appeared 
together many times in history, and always 
in the same placeŠon the fingertips of a 
hand. It was one of the ancient world'
s most coveted and secretive icons. 
 
The Hand of the Mysteries.
 
 
The icon was rarely seen anymore, but thr
oughout history it had symbolized a powerful 
call to action. Langdon strained 
to comprehend the grotesque 
artifact now before him. 
Someone crafted the Hand of the 
Mysteries out of Peter's hand?
 It was unthinkable. 
Traditionally, the icon was sculpted in stone
 or wood or rendered as a drawing. Langdon 
had never heard of the Hand of the Mysteries being fashioned from actual flesh. The 
concept was abhorrent. 
 
ﬁSir?ﬂ a guard said behind 
Langdon. ﬁPlease step back.ﬂ 
 
Langdon barely heard him. 
There are other tattoos
. Although he could not see the 
fingertips of the three clench
ed fingers, Langdon knew these 
fingertips would bear their 
own unique markings. That was the traditi
on. Five symbols in total. Through the 
millennia, the symbols on the fingertips of the Hand of the Mysteries had never changed . 
. . nor had the hand's iconic purpose. 
 
The hand represents . . . an invitation.
 
 
Langdon felt a sudden chill as he recalled th
e words of the man who had brought him 
here. 
Professor, tonight you are receivi
ng the invitation of
 your lifetime.
 In ancient times, 
the Hand of the Mysteries actually served as
 the most coveted i
nvitation on earth. To 
receive this icon was a sacred summons to jo
in an elite groupŠthos
e who were said to 
guard the secret wisdom of all the ages. 
The invitation not only was a great honor, but it 
signified that a master believed you were worthy to receive this hidden wisdom. 
The 
hand of the master extended to the initiate.
 
 
ﬁSir,ﬂ the guard said, putting a firm hand on 
Langdon's shoulder. ﬁI need you to back up 
right now.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know what this means,ﬂ La
ngdon managed. ﬁI can help you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNow!ﬂ the guard said. 
 
ﬁMy friend is in trouble. We have toŠﬂ 
 
Langdon felt powerful arms pulling him up and leading him away from the hand. He 
simply let it happen . . . feeli
ng too off balance to protest. 
 
A formal invitation had just been de
livered. Someone was summoning Langdon to 
unlock a mystical portal that
 would unveil a world of an
cient mysteries and hidden 
knowledge. 
 
But it was all madness. 
 
Delusions of a lunatic.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 14 
 
 
 
Mal™akh™s stretch
 limousine eased away from the U.
S. Capitol, moving eastward down 
Independence Avenue. A young couple on the sidewa
lk strained to see through the tinted 
rear windows, hoping to glimpse a VIP. 
 
I™m in front,
 Mal™akh thought, smiling to himself. 
 
Mal™akh loved the feeling of pow
er he got from driving this massive car all alone. None 
of his other five cars offered hi
m what he needed tonightŠthe 
guarantee
 of privacy
.
 
Total privacy. Limousines in this ci
ty enjoyed a kind of unspoken immunity. 
Embassies 
on wheels.
 Police officers who worked near Capitol Hill were never certain what power 
broker they might mistakenly pull over in a 
limousine, and so most simply chose not to 
take the chance. 
 
As Mal™akh crossed the Anacostia River in
to Maryland, he could 
feel himself moving 
closer to Katherine, pulle
d onward by destiny™s gravity. 
I am being called to a second 
task tonight . . . one I had not imagined.
 Last night, when Peter Solomon told the last of 
his secrets, Mal™akh had lear
ned of the existence of a s
ecret lab in which Katherine 
Solomon had performed miraclesŠstaggeri
ng breakthroughs that Mal™akh realized 
would change the world if they were ever made known. 
 
Her work will unveil the true nature of all things.
 
 
For centuries the ﬁbrightest mindsﬂ on earth 
had ignored the ancient sciences, mocking 
them as ignorant superstitions, arming themselves instead with smug skepticism and 
dazzling new technologiesŠtools that le
d them only further from the truth. 
Every 
generation™s breakthroughs are proven fa
lse by the next generation™s technology.
 And so 
it had gone through the ages. The more man l
earned, the more he realized he did not 
know. 
 
For millennia, mankind had wandered in the darkness . . . but now, as had been 
prophesied, there was a change coming. Afte
r hurtling blindly through history, mankind 
had reached a crossroads. This moment had 
been predicted long ago, prophesied by the 
ancient texts, by the primeval calendars, and 
even by the stars themselves. The date was 
specific, its arrival imminent. It would be 
preceded by a brilliant explosion of knowledge 
. . . a flash of clarity to illuminate the dar
kness and give mankind a final chance to veer 
away from the abyss and take the path of wisdom. 
 
I have come to obscure the light,
 Mal™akh thought. 
This is my role.
 
 
Fate had linked him to Peter and Kath
erine Solomon. The br
eakthroughs Katherine 
Solomon had made within the SMSC woul
d risk opening floodgates of new thinking, 
starting a new Renaissance. Katherine™s re
velations, if made pub
lic, would become a 
catalyst that would inspire mankind to redisc
over the knowledge he had lost, empowering 
him beyond all imagination. 
 
Katherine™s destiny is to light this torch.
 
 
Mine is to extinguish it.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 15 
 
 
 
In total
 darkness, Katherine Solomon groped for th
e outer door of her lab. Finding it, she 
heaved open the lead-lined door and hurried
 into the small entry room. The journey 
across the void had taken only ninety sec
onds, and yet her hear
t was pounding wildly. 
After three years, you™d think I™d be used to that
. Katherine always felt relieved to escape 
the blackness of Pod 5 and step in
to this clean, well-lit space. 
 
The ﬁCubeﬂ was a massive windowless box. Every inch of the interi
or walls and ceiling 
was covered with a stiff mesh of titanium-coated lead fiber, giving the impression of a 
giant cage built inside a cement enclosure. Dividers of frosted Plexiglas separated the 
space into different compartmentsŠa laborator
y, a control room, a mechanical room, a 
bathroom, and a small research library. 
 
Katherine strode briskly into the main lab. 
The bright and sterile work space glistened 
with advanced quantitative equipment: pair
ed electro encephalographs, a femtosecond 
comb, a magneto-optical trap, and quantum-
indeterminate electronic noise REGs, more 
simply known as Random Event Generators. 
 
Despite Noetic Science™s use of cutting-edge
 technologies, the discoveries themselves 
were far more mystical than the cold, high-t
ech machines that were producing them. The 
stuff of magic and myth was fast becoming r
eality as the shocking new data poured in, all 
of it supporting the basic ideology of Noe
tic ScienceŠthe untapped potential of the 
human mind. 
 
The overall thesis was simple: 
We have barely scratched the 
surface of our mental and 
spiritual capabilities.
 
 
Experiments at facilities like the Institute of
 Noetic Sciences (IONS) in California and the 
Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research 
Lab (PEAR) had categorically proven that 
human thought, if properly focused, had 
the ability to affect and change 
physical
 mass. 
Their experiments were no ﬁspoon-bendingﬂ parl
or tricks, but rather highly controlled 
inquiries that all produced the 
same extraordinary result: our 
thoughts
 actually interacted 
with the physical world, whether or not we kne
w it, effecting change all the way down to 
the subatomic realm. 
 
Mind over matter.
 
 
In 2001, in the hours following the horrifying ev
ents of September 11, the field of Noetic 
Science made a quantum leap forward. Four scie
ntists discovered that as the frightened 
world came together and focused in shared 
grief on this single tragedy, the outputs of 
thirty-seven different Random Event Gene
rators around the world suddenly became 
significantly 
less
 random. Somehow, the oneness of 
this shared experience, the 
coalescing of millions of minds, had aff
ected the randomizing function of these 
machines, organizing their outputs 
and bringing order from chaos. 
 
The shocking discovery, it seemed, paralleled the ancient spiritual belief in a ﬁcosmic 
consciousnessﬂŠa vast coales
cing of human intention that
 was actually capable of 
interacting with physical matter. Recently, 
studies in mass meditation and prayer had 
produced similar results in Random Even
t Generators, fueling the claim that 
human 
consciousness,
 as Noetic author Lynne McTagga
rt described it, was a substance 
outside
 
the confines of the body . . . a highly orde
red energy capable of changing the physical 
world. Katherine had been fascinated by McTaggart™s book 
The Intention Experiment,
 
and her global, Web-based studyŠtheinten
tionexperiment.comŠaimed at discovering 
how human intention could aff
ect the world. A handful of other progressive texts had 
also piqued Katherine™s interest. 
 
From this foundation, Katherine Solomon™s re
search had vaulted forward, proving that 
ﬁfocused thoughtﬂ could affect literally 
anything
Šthe growth rate of plants, the direction 
that fish swam in a bowl, the manner in 
which cells divided in a petri dish, the 
synchronization of separately 
automated systems, and the chemical reactions in one™s 
own body. Even the crystalline structure of a newly forming solid was rendered mutable 
by one™s mind; Katherine had created beautif
ully symmetrical i
ce crystals by sending 
loving thoughts to a glass of wate
r as it froze. Incredibly, the 
converse
 was also true: 
when she sent negative, polluting thoughts to th
e water, the ice crystals froze in chaotic, 
fractured forms. 
 
Human thought can literally transform the physical world.
 
 
As Katherine™s experiments grew bolder, he
r results became more astounding. Her work 
in this lab had proven beyond the shadow of a 
doubt that ﬁmind over matterﬂ was not just 
some New Age self-help mantra. The mind had 
the ability to alter the state of matter 
itself, and, more important, the mind had the 
power to encourage the physical world to 
move in a specific direction. 
 
We are the masters of our own universe.
 
 
At the subatomic level, Katherine had shown th
at particles themselves came in and out of 
existence based solely on her 
intention
 to observe them. In a sense, her desire to see a 
particle . . . manifested that particle. Heise
nberg had hinted at this
 reality decades ago, 
and now it had be come a fundamental princi
ple of Noetic Science. In the words of 
Lynne McTaggart: ﬁLiving consciousness so
mehow is the influence that turns the 
possibility
 of something into something 
real
. The most essential i
ngredient in creating 
our universe is the consci
ousness that observes it.ﬂ 
 
The most astonishing aspect of Katherine™s 
work, however, had been 
the realization that 
the mind™s ability to affect the physical world could be 
augmented
 through practice. 
Intention was a 
learned
 skill. Like meditation, harne
ssing the true power of ﬁthoughtﬂ 
required practice. More important . . . some 
people were born more skilled at it than 
others. And throughout history, th
ere had been those few who had become true masters. 
 
This is the missing link between m
odern science and ancient mysticism.
 
 
Katherine had learned this from her brother, 
Peter, and now, as her 
thoughts turned back 
to him, she felt a deepening concern. She walked
 to the lab™s research
 library and peered 
in. Empty. 
 
The library was a small reading roomŠtwo 
Morris chairs, a wooden table, two floor 
lamps, and a wall of mahogany bookshelves
 that held some five hundred books. 
Katherine and Peter had pooled their favorite
 texts here, writings
 on everything from 
particle physics to ancient mysticism. Their 
collection had grown into an eclectic fusion 
of new and old . . . of cutting-edge and hist
orical. Most of Katherine™s books bore titles 
like 
Quantum Consciousness, The New Physics,
 and 
Principles of Neural Science.
 Her 
brother™s bore older, more
 esoteric titles like the 
Kybalion,
 the 
Zohar, The Dancing Wu Li 
Masters,
 and a translation of the Sumerian tablets from the British Museum. 
 
ﬁThe key to our scientific future,ﬂ her br
other often said, ﬁis hidden in our past.ﬂ A 
lifelong scholar of history, science, and mystic
ism, Peter had been the first to encourage 
Katherine to boost her university science e
ducation with an unde
rstanding of early 
Hermetic philosophy. She had been only nine
teen years old when Peter sparked her 
interest in the link between modern science and ancient mysticism. 
 
ﬁSo tell me, Kate,ﬂ her brother had aske
d while she was home on vacation during her 
sophomore year at Yale. ﬁWhat are Elis r
eading these days in theoretical physics?ﬂ 
 
Katherine had stood in her family™s book-fille
d library and recited her demanding reading 
list. 
 
ﬁImpressive,ﬂ her brother replied. ﬁEinstei
n, Bohr, and Hawking are modern geniuses. 
But are you reading anything older?ﬂ 
 
Katherine scratched her head. ﬁYou mean like . . . Newton?ﬂ 
 
He smiled. ﬁKeep going.ﬂ At twenty-seven, Pete
r had already made a name for himself in 
the academic world, and he and Katherine had grown to savor this kind of playful 
intellectual sparring. 
 
Older than Newton?
 Katherine™s head now filled with distant names like Ptolemy, 
Pythagoras, and Hermes Trismegistus. 
Nobody reads that stuff anymore.
 
 
Her brother ran a finger down th
e long shelf of cracked leat
her bindings and old dusty 
tomes. ﬁThe scientific wisdom of the ancien
ts was staggering . . . modern physics is only 
now
 beginning to comprehend it all.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter,ﬂ she said, ﬁyou already told me that
 the Egyptians underst
ood levers and pulleys 
long before Newton, and that the early alch
emists did work on a par with modern 
chemistry, but so what? 
Today™s
 physics deals with concepts that would have been 
unimaginable to the ancients.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLike what?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell . . . like 
entanglement theory,
 for one!ﬂ Subatomic research had now proven 
categorically that all matter was interconnected . 
. . entangled in a single unified mesh . . . 
a kind of universal oneness.
 ﬁYou™re telling me the ancients sat around discussing 
entanglement
 theory?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAbsolutely!ﬂ Peter said, pushing his long, da
rk bangs out of his eyes. ﬁEntanglement 
was at the core of primeval beliefs. Its names 
are as old as history itself . . . Dharmakaya, 
Tao, Brahman. In fact, man™s oldest spir
itual quest was to perceive his own 
entanglement, to sense his own interconnection with all things. He has always wanted to 
become ‚one™ with the universe . . . to achie
ve the state of ‚at-one
-ment.™ ﬂ Her brother 
raised his eyebrows. ﬁTo this day, Jews and Ch
ristians still strive for ‚atonement™ . . . 
although most of us have forgotten it is
 actually ‚at-one-men
t™ we™re seeking.ﬂ 
 
Katherine sighed, having forgotten how hard it 
was to argue with a man so well versed in 
history. ﬁOkay, but you™re talking 
in generalities. I™m talking 
specific
 physics.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThen 
be
 specific.ﬂ His keen eyes challenged her now. 
 
ﬁOkay, how about something as simple as 
polarity
Šthe positive/negative balance of the 
subatomic realm. Obviously, the ancients didn™t understŠﬂ 
 
ﬁHold on!ﬂ Her brother pulled 
down a large dusty text, which he dropped loudly on the 
library table. ﬁModern polarity is nothing but 
the ‚dual world™ descri
bed by Krishna here 
in the Bhagavad Gita over two thousand 
years ago. A dozen other books in here, 
including the 
Kybalion,
 talk about binary systems and 
the opposing forces in nature.ﬂ 
 
Katherine was skeptical. ﬁOkay, but if 
we talk about modern discoveries in 
subatomics
Š
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, for exampleŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThen we must look 
here,
ﬂ Peter said, striding down hi
s long bookshelf and pulling out 
another text. ﬁThe sacred Hindu Vendantic 
scriptures known as the Upanishads.ﬂ He 
dropped the tome heavily on the first. ﬁHeisenberg and Schrödinger 
studied
 this text and 
credited it with helping them fo
rmulate some of their theories.ﬂ 
 
The showdown continued for several minutes, 
and the stack of dusty books on the desk 
grew taller and taller. Finally Katherine th
rew up her hands in frustration. ﬁOkay! You 
made your point, but I want to study cutting-edge 
theoretical
 physics. The future of 
science! I really doubt Krishna or Vyasa had 
much to say about superstring theory and 
multidimensional cosmological models.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re right. They didn™t.ﬂ Her brother 
paused, a smile crossi
ng his lips. ﬁIf you™re 
talking superstring theory . . .ﬂ He wa
ndered over to the bookshelf yet again. ﬁThen 
you™re talking 
this
 book here.ﬂ He heaved out a co
lossal leather-bound 
book and dropped 
it with a crash onto the desk. ﬁThirteenth-centu
ry translation of the original medieval 
Aramaic.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSuperstring theory in the thirteenth century
?!ﬂ Katherine wasn™t buying it. ﬁCome on!ﬂ 
 
Superstring theory was a brand-new cosmol
ogical model. Based on the most recent 
scientific observations, it suggested the 
multidimensional universe was made up not of 
three
 . . . but rather of 
ten
 dimensions, which all interacted
 like vibrating strings, similar 
to resonating violin strings. 
 
Katherine waited as her brot
her heaved open the book, ran th
rough the ornately printed 
table of contents, and then flipped to a spot
 near the beginning of the book. ﬁRead this.ﬂ 
He pointed to a faded page of text and diagrams. 
 
Dutifully, Katherine studied the page. The tran
slation was old-fashioned and very hard to 
read, but to her utter amazement, the te
xt and drawings clearly outlined the 
exact
 same 
universe heralded by modern superstring 
theoryŠa ten-dimens
ional universe of 
resonating strings. As she continued read
ing, she suddenly gasped and recoiled. ﬁMy 
God, it even describes how six of the dimens
ions are entangled and act as one?!ﬂ She 
took a frightened step backward. ﬁWhat 
is
 this book?!ﬂ 
 
Her brother grinned. ﬁSomething I™m hoping you™ll 
read one day.ﬂ He flipped back to the 
title page, where an ornately pr
inted plate bore three words. 
 
The Complete Zohar.
 
 
Although Katherine had never read the 
Zohar,
 she knew it was the fundamental text of 
early Jewish mysticism, once believed so pot
ent that it was reserved only for the most 
erudite rabbis. 
 
Katherine eyed the book. ﬁYou
™re saying the early mystics 
knew
 their universe had ten 
dimensions?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAbsolutely.ﬂ He motioned to 
the page™s illustration of te
n intertwined circles called 
Sephiroth. ﬁObviously, the nomencl
ature is esoteric, but the p
hysics is very advanced.ﬂ 
 
Katherine didn™t know how to re
spond. ﬁBut . . . then why don™t more people study this?ﬂ 
 
Her brother smiled. ﬁThey 
will
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t understand.ﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine, we have been bor
n into wonderful times. A change is coming. Human beings 
are poised on the threshold of a new age when 
they will begin turning their eyes back to 
nature and to the old ways . . . back to the ideas in books like the 
Zohar
 and other ancient 
texts from around the world. Powerful truth 
has its own gravity a
nd eventually pulls 
people back to it. There will come a day when 
modern science begins in earnest to study 
the wisdom of the ancients . . . that will be 
the day that mankind begins to find answers to 
the big questions that still elude him.ﬂ 
 
That night, Katherine eagerly 
began reading her brother™s an
cient texts and quickly came 
to understand that he was right. 
The ancients possessed prof
ound scientific wisdom.
 
Today™s science was not so much making ﬁdis
coveriesﬂ as it was making ﬁrediscoveries.ﬂ 
Mankind, it seemed, had once grasped the true natu
re of the universe . . . but had let go . . 
. and forgotten. 
 
Modern physics can help us remember!
 This quest had become
 Katherine™s mission in 
lifeŠto use advanced science to
 rediscover the lost wisdom of
 the ancients. It was more 
than academic thrill that kept her motivate
d. Beneath it all was her conviction that the 
world 
needed
 this understanding . . . now more than ever. 
 
At the rear of the lab, Katherine saw he
r brother™s white lab coat hanging on its hook 
along with her own. Reflexively, she pulle
d out her phone to check for messages. 
Nothing. A voice echoed again in her memory. 
That which your brother believes is 
hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found. Sometimes
 a legend that endures for centuries . . . 
endures for a reason.
 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Katherine said aloud. ﬁI
t can™t possibly be real.ﬂ 
 
Sometimes a legend was just thatŠa legend. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 16 
 
 
 
Security chief
 Trent Anderson stormed back toward 
the Capitol Rotunda, fuming at the 
failure of his security team. One of his men had just found a sling and an army-surplus 
jacket in an alcove near the east portico. 
 
The goddamn guy walked right out of here!
 
 
Anderson had already assigned teams to star
t scanning exterior video, but by the time 
they found anything, this guy would be long gone. 
 
Now, as Anderson entered the Rotunda to survey the damage, he saw that the situation 
had been contained as well as could be expect
ed. All four entrances to the Rotunda were 
closed with as inconspicuous a method of crow
d control as Security had at its disposalŠa 
velvet swag, an apologetic 
guard, and a sign that read 
THIS ROOM TEMPORARILY 
CLOSED FOR CLEANING
. The dozen or so witnesses we
re all being herded into a 
group on the eastern perimeter of the room, 
where the guards were collecting cell phones 
and cameras; the last thing Anderson needed 
was for one of these people to send a cell-
phone snapshot to CNN. 
 
One of the detained witnesses, a tall, dark-hai
red man in a tweed sport coat, was trying to 
break away from the group to speak to the 
chief. The man was currently in a heated 
discussion with the guards. 
 
ﬁI™ll speak to him in a moment,ﬂ Anderson 
called over to the guards. ﬁFor now, please 
hold everyone in the main lobby until we sort this out.ﬂ 
 
Anderson turned his eyes now to the hand, wh
ich stood at attention 
in the middle of the 
room. 
For the love of God
. In fifteen years on security deta
il for the Capitol Building, he 
had seen some strange things. But nothing like this. 
 
Forensics had better get here fast and get this thing out of my building.
 
 
Anderson moved closer, seeing 
that the bloody wrist had been skewered on a spiked 
wooden base to make the hand stand up. 
Wood and flesh,
 he thought. 
Invisible to metal 
detectors.
 The only metal was a large gold ring, wh
ich Anderson assumed had either been 
wanded or casually pulled off the dead fi
nger by the suspect as if it were his own. 
 
Anderson crouched down to examine the hand. It 
looked as if it had belonged to a man of 
about sixty. The ring bore some kind of ornate
 seal with a two-headed bird and the 
number 33. Anderson didn™t recognize it. What r
eally caught his eye were the tiny tattoos 
on the tips of the thumb and index finger. 
 
A goddamn freak show.
 
 
ﬁChief?ﬂ One of the guards hurried over
, holding out a phone. ﬁPersonal call for you. 
Security switchboard just patched it through.ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked at him like he was insane. ﬁI
™m in the middle of something here,ﬂ he 
growled. 
 
The guard™s face was pale. He covered 
the mouthpiece and whispered. ﬁIt™s CIA.ﬂ 
 
Anderson did a double take. 
CIA heard about this already?!
 
 
ﬁIt™s their Office of Security.ﬂ 
 
Anderson stiffened. 
Holy shit.
 He glanced uneasily at the phone in the guard™s hand. 
 
In Washington™s vast ocean of intelligence 
agencies, the CIA™s Office of Security was 
something of a Bermuda TriangleŠa mysteri
ous and treacherous region from which all 
who knew of it steered clear whenever possi
ble. With a seemingly self-destructive 
mandate, the OS had been created by the 
CIA for one strange purposeŠto spy on the 
CIA itself. Like a powerful internal-affairs office, the OS monitored all CIA employees 
for illicit behavior: misappropr
iation of funds, selling of se
crets, stealing classified 
technologies, and use of illegal to
rture tactics, to name a few. 
 
They spy on America™s spies.
 
 
With investigative carte blanche in all matters
 of national security, the OS had a long and 
potent reach. Anderson could not fathom why they 
would be interested in this incident at 
the Capitol, or how they had found out so fa
st. Then again, the OS was rumored to have 
eyes everywhere
.
 For all Anderson knew, they had a dire
ct feed of U.S. Capitol security 
cameras. This incident did not match OS dir
ectives in any way, although the timing of the 
call seemed too coincidental to Anderson to 
be about anything othe
r than this severed 
hand. 
 
ﬁChief?ﬂThe guard was holding the phone out 
to him like a hot potato. ﬁYou need to take 
this call right now. It™s . . .ﬂ He paused 
and silently mouthed two syllables. ﬁSA-TO.ﬂ 
 
Anderson squinted hard at the man. 
You™ve got to be kidding.
 He felt his palms begin to 
sweat. 
Sato is handling this personally?
 
 
The overlord of the Office of SecurityŠD
irector Inoue SatoŠwas a legend in the 
intelligence community. Born inside the fen
ces of a Japanese internment camp in 
Manzanar, California, in the aftermath of P
earl Harbor, Sato was 
a toughened survivor 
who had never forgotten the horrors of war, or the perils of insufficient military 
intelligence. Now, having risen to one of the most secretive and potent posts in U.S. 
intelligence work, Sato had proven an uncompromising patriot as well as a terrifying 
enemy to any who stood in opposition. Seldom
 seen but universally feared, the OS 
director cruised the deep waters of the CI
A like a leviathan who surfaced only to devour 
its prey. 
 
Anderson had met Sato face-to
-face only once, and the memo
ry of looking into those 
cold black eyes was enough to make him count 
his blessings that he would be having this 
conversation by telephone. 
 
Anderson took the phone and brought 
it to his lips. ﬁDir
ector Sato,ﬂ he said in as friendly 
a voice as possible. ﬁThis is Chief Anderson. How may IŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThere is a man in your building to whom
 I need to speak immediately.ﬂ The OS 
director™s voice was unmistakableŠlike grav
el grating on a chalkboard. Throat cancer 
surgery had left Sato with a profoundly unnervin
g intonation and a repulsive neck scar to 
match. ﬁI want you to find him for me immediately.ﬂ 
 
That™s all? You want me to page someone?
 Anderson felt suddenly hopeful that maybe 
the timing of this call was pure co
incidence. ﬁWho are you looking for?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHis name is Robert Langdon. I believe he
 is inside your building right now.ﬂ 
 
Langdon?
 The name sounded vaguely familiar, but Anderson couldn™t quite place it. He 
was now wondering if Sato knew about the hand
. ﬁI™m in the Rotunda at the moment,ﬂ 
Anderson said, ﬁbut we™ve got some tourists 
here . . . hold on.ﬂ He lowered his phone and 
called out to the group, ﬁFolks, is ther
e anyone here by the name of Langdon?ﬂ 
 
After a short silence, a deep voice replied fr
om the crowd of tourists. ﬁYes. I™m Robert 
Langdon.ﬂ 
 
Sato knows all.
 Anderson craned his neck, tr
ying to see who had spoken up. 
 
The same man who had been trying to get to 
him earlier stepped away from the others. 
He looked distraught . . . but familiar somehow. 
 
Anderson raised the phone to his 
lips. ﬁYes, Mr. Langdon is here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPut him on,ﬂ Sato said coarsely. 
 
Anderson exhaled. 
Better him than me.
 ﬁHold on.ﬂ He waved Langdon over. As Langdon 
approached, Anderson suddenly realized
 why the name sounded familiar. 
I just read an 
article about this gu
y. What the hell is
 he 
doing here?
 
 
Despite Langdon™s six-foot frame and athle
tic build, Anderson saw none of the cold, 
hardened edge he expected from a man famous
 for surviving an expl
osion at the Vatican 
and a manhunt in Paris. 
This guy eluded the French police . . . in loafers?
 He looked 
more like someone Anderson would expect to fi
nd hearthside in some Ivy League library 
reading Dostoyevsky. 
 
ﬁMr. Langdon?ﬂAnderson said, walking halfwa
y to meet him. ﬁI™m Chief Anderson. I 
handle security here. Y
ou have a phone call.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFor 
me
?ﬂ Langdon™s blue eyes looked anxious and uncertain. 
 
Anderson held out the phone. ﬁIt™s 
the CIA™s Office of Security.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ve never heard of it.ﬂ 
 
Anderson smiled ominously. ﬁWell, sir, 
it™s
 heard of 
you
.ﬂ 
 
Langdon put the phone to his ear. ﬁYes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁRobert Langdon?ﬂ Director Sato™s harsh voi
ce blared in the tiny speaker, loud enough 
that Anderson could hear. 
 
ﬁYes?ﬂ Langdon replied. 
 
Anderson stepped closer to hear what Sato was saying. 
 
ﬁThis is Director Inoue Sat
o, Mr. Langdon. I am handling a cr
isis at the moment, and I 
believe you have information that can help me.ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked hopeful. ﬁIs this about Pete
r Solomon? Do you know where he is?!ﬂ 
 
Peter Solomon?
 Anderson felt entirely out of the loop. 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ Sato replied. ﬁI am as
king the questions at the moment.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter Solomon is in very serious trouble,ﬂ Langdon excl
aimed. ﬁSome madman justŠﬂ 
 
ﬁExcuse me,ﬂ Sato said, cutting him off. 
 
Anderson cringed. 
Bad move.
 Interrupting a top CIA offici
al™s line of questioning was a 
mistake only a civilian would make. 
I thought Langdon was supposed to be smart.
 
 
ﬁListen carefully,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁAs we speak, 
this nation is facing a 
crisis. I have been 
advised that you have information that can he
lp me avert it. Now, I am going to ask you 
again. What information do you possess?ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked lost. ﬁDirector, I have no 
idea what you™re talking about. All I™m 
concerned with is finding Peter andŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo idea?ﬂ Sato challenged. 
 
Anderson saw Langdon bristle. The professor no
w took a more aggressive tone. ﬁNo, sir. 
No damned idea at all.ﬂ Anderson winced. 
Wrong
. 
Wrong. Wrong.
 Robert Langdon had 
just made a very costly mistake 
in dealing with Director Sato. 
 
Incredibly, Anderson now realized
 it was too late. To his ast
onishment, Director Sato had 
just appeared on the far side of the Rot
unda, and was approachi
ng fast behind Langdon. 
Sato is in the building!
 Anderson held his breat
h and braced for impact. 
Langdon has no 
idea
. 
 
The director™s dark form drew closer, phone held to ear, black eyes 
locked like two lasers 
on Langdon™s back. 
 
Langdon clutched the police chief™s phone and felt 
a rising frustration as
 the OS director 
pressed him. ﬁI™m sorry, sir,ﬂ Langdon said 
tersely, ﬁbut I can™t read your mind. What do 
you want from me?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat do I want from you?ﬂ The OS direct
or™s grating voice crackled through Langdon™s 
phone, scraping and hollow, like that of a dying man with strep throat. 
 
As the man spoke, Langdon felt a tap on his should
er. He turned and his eyes were drawn 
down . . . directly into the 
face of a tiny Japanese woman. She had a fierce expression, a 
mottled complexion, thinning hair, tobacco-sta
ined teeth, and an unsettling white scar 
that sliced horizontally across her neck. 
The woman™s gnarled hand held a cell phone to 
her ear, and when her lips moved, Langdon h
eard the familiar raspy voice through his 
cell phone. 
 
ﬁWhat do I want from you, Professor?ﬂ She ca
lmly closed her phone and glared at him. 
ﬁFor starters, you can stop calling me ‚sir.™ ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared, mortified. ﬁMa™am, I . . . a
pologize. Our connection was poor andŠﬂ 
 
ﬁOur connection was fine, Professor,ﬂ she sa
id. ﬁAnd I have an extremely low tolerance 
for bullshit.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 17 
 
 
 
Director Inoue Sato
 was a fearsome specimenŠa bris
tly tempest of a woman who stood 
a mere four feet ten 
inches. She was bone thin, with ja
gged features and a dermatological 
condition known as vitiligo, which gave he
r complexion the mottled look of coarse 
granite blotched with lichen. Her rumpled bl
ue pantsuit hung on her emaciated frame like 
a loose sack, the open-necked blouse doing nothi
ng to hide the scar across her neck. It 
had been noted by her coworkers that Sato
™s only acquiescence to physical vanity 
appeared to be that of pluc
king her substantial mustache. 
 
For over a decade, Inoue Sato had overseen 
the CIA™s Office of Security. She possessed 
an off-the-chart IQ and chillingly accurate in
stincts, a combination which girded her with 
a self-confidence that made her terrifyi
ng to anyone who could not perform the 
impossible. Not even a terminal diagnosis 
of aggressive throat cancer had knocked her 
from her perch. The battle had cost her one 
month of work, half her voice box, and a third 
of her body weight, but she returned to the o
ffice as if nothing had happened. Inoue Sato 
appeared to be indestructible. 
 
Robert Langdon suspected he was probably not 
the first to mistake Sato for a man on the 
phone, but the director was still glari
ng at him with simmering black eyes. 
 
ﬁAgain, my apologies, ma™am,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁI™m
 still trying to get my bearings hereŠ
the person who claims to have Peter Solomon tricked me into coming to D.C. this 
evening.ﬂ He pulled the fax from his jacket. 
ﬁThis is what he sent me earlier. I wrote 
down the tail number of the plane he sent, 
so maybe if you call the FAA and track theŠﬂ 
 
Sato™s tiny hand shot out and snatched the sh
eet of paper. She stuck it in her pocket 
without even opening it. ﬁProfessor, I am 
running this investigation, and until you start 
telling me what I want to know, I s
uggest you not speak unless spoken to.ﬂ 
 
Sato now spun to the police chief. 
 
ﬁChief Anderson,ﬂ she said, stepping entirely
 too close and stari
ng up at him through tiny 
black eyes, ﬁwould you care to te
ll me what the hell is going on here? The guard at the 
east gate told me you found a human 
hand on the floor. Is that true?ﬂ 
 
Anderson stepped to the side and revealed th
e object in the center
 of the floor. ﬁYes, 
ma™am, only a few minutes ago.ﬂ 
 
She glanced at the hand as if it were nothing more than a misplaced piece of clothing. 
ﬁAnd yet you didn™t mention it to me when I called?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI . . . I thought you knew.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo 
not
 lie to me.ﬂ 
 
Anderson wilted under her gaze, but his voice re
mained confident. ﬁMa™am, this situation 
is under control.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI really doubt that,ﬂ Sato 
said, with equal confidence. 
 
ﬁA forensics team is on the way. Whoever 
did this may have left fingerprints.ﬂ 
 
Sato looked skeptical. ﬁI think someone cl
ever enough to walk through your security 
checkpoint with a human hand is probably 
clever enough not to leave fingerprints.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat may be true, but I have a 
responsibility to investigate.ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, I am relieving you of
 your responsibility as of th
is moment. I™m taking over.ﬂ 
 
Anderson stiffened. ﬁThis is not exactly OS domain, is it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAbsolutely. This is an is
sue of national security.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s hand?
 Langdon wondered, watching their exchange in a daze. 
National security?
 
Langdon was sensing that his own urgent goal 
of finding Peter was not Sato™s. The OS 
director seemed to be on another page entirely. 
 
Anderson looked puzzled as well. ﬁNational 
security? With all due respect, ma™amŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThe last I checked,ﬂ she interrupted, ﬁI 
outrank you. I suggest you do exactly as I say, 
and that you do it 
without question.ﬂ 
 
Anderson nodded and swallowed hard. ﬁBut shou
ldn™t we at least pr
int the fingers to 
confirm the hand belongs to Peter Solomon?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll confirm it,ﬂ Langdon said, feeling a sicken
ing certainty. ﬁI recognize his ring . . . and 
his hand.ﬂ He paused. ﬁThe tattoos are new,
 though. Someone did that to him recently.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ Sato looked unnerved for th
e first time since arriving. ﬁThe hand is 
tattooed
?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁThe thumb has a crown. And the index finger a star.ﬂ 
 
Sato pulled out a pair of 
glasses and walked toward 
the hand, circling like a shark. 
 
ﬁAlso,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁalthough you can™t see th
e other three fingers
, I™m certain they 
will have tattoos on the fingertips as well.ﬂ 
 
Sato looked intrigued by the comment and mo
tioned to Anderson. ﬁChief, can you look at 
the other fingertips for us, please?ﬂ 
 
Anderson crouched down beside the hand, being car
eful not to touch it
. He put his cheek 
near the floor and looked up under the clenched 
fingertips. ﬁHe™s right, ma™am. All of the 
fingertips have tattoos, although I can
™t quite see what the otherŠﬂ 
 
ﬁA sun, a lantern, and a ke
y,ﬂ Langdon said flatly. 
 
Sato turned fully to Langdon now, her sma
ll eyes appraising him. ﬁAnd how exactly 
would you know that?ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared back. ﬁThe image of a human ha
nd, marked in this 
way on the fingertips, 
is a very old icon. It™s known as
 ‚the Hand of the Mysteries.™ ﬂ 
 
Anderson stood up abruptly. ﬁThis thing has a 
name
?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁIt™s one of the most secretive icons of the ancient world.ﬂ 
 
Sato cocked her head. ﬁThen might I ask what
 the hell it™s doing in the middle of the U.S. 
Capitol?ﬂ 
 
Langdon wished he would wake up from this nightmare. ﬁTraditionally, ma™am, it was 
used as an invitation.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAn invitation . . . to what?ﬂ she demanded. 
 
Langdon looked down at the symbols on his frie
nd™s severed hand. ﬁFor centuries, the 
Hand of the Mysteries served as a mystical
 summons. Basically, it™s an invitation to 
receive secret knowledgeŠprotected wi
sdom known only to an elite few.ﬂ 
 
Sato folded her thin arms and stared up at hi
m with jet-black eyes. 
ﬁWell, Professor, for 
someone who claims to have no clue why he™s
 here . . . you™re doing quite well so far.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 18 
 
 
 
Katherine Solomon
 donned her white lab coat and bega
n her usual arrival routineŠher 
ﬁroundsﬂ as her brother called them. 
 
Like a nervous parent checking on a sleepi
ng baby, Katherine poked her head into the 
mechanical room. The hydrogen fuel cell wa
s running smoothly, its backup tanks all 
safely nestled in their racks. 
 
Katherine continued down th
e hall to the data-storage room. As always, the two 
redundant holographic backup units
 hummed safely within th
eir temperature-controlled 
vault. 
All of my research,
 she thought, gazing in through the 
three-inch-thick shatterproof 
glass. Holographic data-storage devices, unlik
e their refrigerator-s
ize ancestors, looked 
more like sleek stereo components, each perched atop a columnar pedestal. 
 
Both of her lab™s holographic drives we
re synchronized and identicalŠserving as 
redundant backups to safeguard identical copi
es of her work. Most backup protocols 
advocated a secondary backup system 
off-site
 in case of earthquake, 
fire, or theft, but 
Katherine and her brother agreed that secr
ecy was paramount; once this data left the 
building to an off-site server, they could 
no longer be certain it would stay private. 
 
Content that everything was r
unning smoothly here, she headed back down the hallway. 
As she rounded the corner, however, she s
potted something unexpected across the lab. 
What in the world?
 A muted glow was glinting off all 
the equipment. She hurried in to 
have a look, surprised to see light emanating 
from behind the Plexigla
s wall of the control 
room. 
 
He™s here.
 Katherine flew across the lab, arriving 
at the control-room 
door and heaving it 
open. ﬁPeter!ﬂ she said, running in. The plum
p woman seated at the control room™s 
terminal jumped up. ﬁOh my God!
 Katherine! You scared me!ﬂ 
 
Trish DunneŠthe only other person on earth
 allowed back hereŠwas Katherine™s 
metasystems analyst and seldom worked week
ends. The twenty-six-y
ear-old redhead was 
a genius data modeler and had signed a nondisclosure document worthy of the KGB. 
Tonight, she was apparently analyzing data 
on the control room™s plasma wallŠa huge 
flat-screen display that looked like so
mething out of NASA mission control. 
 
ﬁSorry,ﬂ Trish said. ﬁI didn™t know you were he
re yet. I was trying to finish up before you 
and your brother arrived.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHave you spoken to him? He™s late 
and he™s not answering his phone.ﬂ 
 
Trish shook her head. ﬁI bet he™s
 still trying to figure out 
how to use that new iPhone you 
gave him.ﬂ 
 
Katherine appreciated Trish™s 
good humor, and Trish™s presen
ce here had just given her 
an idea. ﬁActually, I™m glad you™re in toni
ght. You might be able to help me with 
something, if you don™t mind?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhatever it is, I™m sure it beats football.ﬂ 
 
Katherine took a deep breath, calming her mind. 
ﬁI™m not sure how to explain this, but 
earlier today, I heard 
an unusual story . . .ﬂ 
 
Trish Dunne didn™t know what story Katherin
e Solomon had heard, but clearly it had her 
on edge. Her boss™s usually calm gray eyes l
ooked anxious, and she had tucked her hair 
behind her ears three times since 
entering the roomŠa nervous ﬁtell,
ﬂ
 as Trish called it. 
Brilliant scientist. Lousy poker player.
 
 
ﬁTo me,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁthis story sounds lik
e fiction . . . an old legend. And yet . . .ﬂ 
She paused, tucking a wisp of hair behind her ears once again. 
 
ﬁAnd yet?ﬂ 
 
Katherine sighed. ﬁAnd yet I was told today by 
a trusted source that the legend is true.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay . . .ﬂ 
Where is she going with this?
 
 
ﬁI™m going to talk to my brothe
r about it, but it oc
curs to me that maybe you can help me 
shed some light on it before I do. I™d love to know if this legend has ever been 
corroborated anywhere else in history.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIn all of history?ﬂ 
 
Katherine nodded. ﬁAnywhere in the world, in
 any language, at any 
point in history.ﬂ 
 
Strange request,
 Trish thought, 
but certainly feasible.
 Ten years ago, the task would have 
been impossible. Today, however, with the 
Internet, the World Wide Web, and the 
ongoing digitization of the great libraries and museums in the world, Katherine™s goal 
could be achieved by using a relatively simple 
search engine equipped with an army of 
translation modules and so
me well-chosen keywords. 
 
ﬁNo problem,ﬂ Trish said. Many of the la
b™s research books contained passages in 
ancient languages, and so Trish was often as
ked to write specialized Optical Character 
Recognition translation modules 
to generate English text from obscure languages. She 
had to be the only metasystems specialist on earth who had built OCR translation 
modules in Old Frisia
n, Maek, and Akkadian. 
 
The modules would help, but the trick to build
ing an effective search spider was all in 
choosing the right key words
. Unique but not overly restrictive.
 
 
Katherine looked to be a step ahead of 
Trish and was already jotting down possible 
keywords on a slip of paper. Katherine had written down several when she paused, 
thought a moment, and then wrote several mo
re. ﬁOkay,ﬂ she finally said, handing Trish 
the slip of paper. 
 
Trish perused the list of search 
strings, and her eyes grew wide. 
What kind of crazy 
legend is Katherine investigating?
 ﬁYou want me to search for 
all
 of these key phrases?ﬂ 
One of the words Trish didn™t even recognize. 
Is that even English?
 ﬁDo you really think 
we™ll find all of these in one place? Verbatim?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™d like to try.ﬂ 
 
Trish would have said 
impossible,
 but the I-word was banned he
re. Katherine considered 
it a dangerous mind-set in a field that ofte
n transformed preconceived falsehoods into 
confirmed truths. Trish Dunne 
seriously doubted this key-phrase search would fall into 
that category. 
 
ﬁHow long for results
?ﬂ Katherine asked. 
 
ﬁA few minutes to write the spider and launch it. After that, maybe fifteen for the spider 
to exhaust itself.ﬂ  
 
ﬁSo fast?ﬂ Katherine looked encouraged.  
 
Trish nodded. Traditional search engines ofte
n required a full day to crawl across the 
entire online universe, find new documents, di
gest their content, and add it to their 
searchable database. But this was not the 
kind of search spider Trish would write. 
 
ﬁI™ll write a program called a 
delegator,
ﬂ Trish explained. ﬁIt™s not
 entirely kosher, but 
it™s fast. Essentially, it™s a program that orde
rs other people™s search engines to do our 
work. Most databases have a search function 
built inŠlibraries, museums, universities, 
governments. So I write a spider that finds 
their
 search engines, inputs your keywords, 
and asks them to search. This way, we ha
rness the power of thousands of engines, 
working in unison.ﬂ 
 
Katherine looked impresse
d. ﬁParallel processing.ﬂ 
 
A kind of metasystem.
 ﬁI™ll call you if 
I get anything.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI appreciate it,Trish.ﬂ Katherine patted her on 
the back and headed for the door. ﬁI™ll be 
in the library.ﬂ 
 
Trish settled in to write the program. Coding a 
search spider was a menial task far below 
her skill level, but Trish 
Dunne didn™t care. She woul
d do anything for Katherine 
Solomon. Sometimes Trish still couldn™t be
lieve the good fortune that had brought her 
here. 
 
You™ve come a long way, baby.
 
 
Just over a year ago, Trish had quit her job as
 a metasystems analyst in one of the high-
tech industry™s many cubicle farms. In
 her off-hours, she did some freelance 
programming and started an industry blogŠﬁ
Future Applications in Computational 
Metasystem AnalysisﬂŠalthough she doubted 
anyone read it. Then one evening her 
phone rang. 
 
ﬁTrish Dunne?ﬂ a woman™s voice asked politely. 
 
ﬁYes, who™s calling, please?ﬂ 
 
ﬁMy name is Katherine Solomon.ﬂ 
 
Trish almost fainted on the spot. 
Katherine Solomon?
 ﬁI just read your bookŠ
Noetic 
Science: Modern Gateway to Ancient WisdomŠand
 I wrote about it on my blog!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, I know,ﬂ the woman replied gr
aciously. ﬁThat™s why I™m calling.ﬂ 
 
Of course it is,
 Trish realized, feeling dumb. 
Even brilliant scientis
ts Google themselves.
 
 
ﬁYour blog intrigues me,ﬂ Katherine told her.
 ﬁI wasn™t aware metasystems modeling had 
come so far.ﬂ  
 
ﬁYes, ma™am,ﬂ Trish managed, starstruck. ﬁD
ata models are an exploding technology 
with far-reaching applications.ﬂ 
 
For several minutes, the two women chatted about Trish™s work in metasystems, 
discussing her experience anal
yzing, modeling, and pr
edicting the flow 
of massive data 
fields. 
 
ﬁObviously, your book is way over my head,ﬂ Tr
ish said, ﬁbut I understood enough to see 
an intersection with my metasystems work.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYour blog said you believe metasystems modeling can 
transform
 the study of Noetics?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAbsolutely. I believe metasystems c
ould turn Noetics into real science
.
ﬂ 
 
ﬁ
Real
 science?ﬂ Katherine™s tone hardened
 slightly. ﬁAs opposed to . . . ?ﬂ 
 
Oh shit, that came out wrong.
 ﬁUm, what I meant is that No
etics is more . . . esoteric.ﬂ 
 
Katherine laughed. ﬁRelax, I™m ki
dding. I get that all the time.ﬂ 
 
I™m not surprised,
 Trish thought
.
 Even the Institute of Noetic Sciences in California 
described the field in arcane and abstruse 
language, defining it as 
the study of mankind™s 
ﬁdirect and immediate access to knowledge 
beyond what is available to our normal 
senses and the power of reason.ﬂ 
 
The word 
noetic,
 Trish had learned, derived from the ancient Greek 
nous
Štranslating 
roughly to ﬁinner knowledgeﬂ or
 ﬁintuitive consciousness.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m interested in your metasystems work,ﬂ 
Katherine said, ﬁand how it might relate to a 
project I™m working on. Any chance you™d be wi
lling to meet? I™d love to pick your 
brain.ﬂ 
 
Katherine Solomon wants to pick
 my 
brain?
 It felt like Maria Sharapova had called for 
tennis tips. 
 
The next day a white Volvo pulled into Trish™s driveway and an attractive, willowy 
woman in blue jeans got out. Tris
h immediately felt two feet tall. 
Great,
 she groaned. 
Smart, rich, and thinŠand I™m s
upposed to believe God is good?
 But Katherine™s 
unassuming air set Trish instantly at ease. 
 
The two of them settled in on Trish™s huge back porch overlooking an impressive piece 
of property. 
 
ﬁYour house is amazing,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
ﬁThanks. I got lucky in college and li
censed some software I™d written.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMetasystems stuff?ﬂ 
 
ﬁA precursor to metasystems. Following 9/11, the government was intercepting and 
crunching enormous data fieldsŠcivilian 
e-mail, cell phone, fax, text, Web sitesŠ
sniffing for keywords associated with terro
rist communications. So
 I wrote a piece of 
software that let them process their data 
field in a second way . . . pulling from it an 
additional intelligence product.ﬂ She smiled. 
ﬁEssentially, my software let them take 
America™s temperature.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 
 
Trish laughed. ﬁYeah, sounds crazy, I know. What 
I mean is that it quantified the nation™s 
emotional
 state. It offered a kind of cosmic consciousness barometer, if you will.ﬂ Trish 
explained how, using a data field of the 
nation™s communications, one could assess the 
nation™s 
mood
 based on the ﬁoccurrence densityﬂ of
 certain keywords and emotional 
indicators in the data field. Happier times 
had happier language, and stressful times vice 
versa. In the event, for example, of a terrori
st attack, the government could use data fields 
to measure the shift in America™s psyche and better advise the president on the emotional 
impact of the event. 
 
ﬁFascinating,ﬂ Katherine said, stroking her 
chin. ﬁSo essentially
 you™re examining a 
population of individuals . . . as if it were a 
single
 organism.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. A 
metasystem
. A single entity defined by the 
sum of its parts. The human body, 
for example, consists of millions of individual cells, each with different attributes and 
different purposes, but it func
tions as a single entity.ﬂ 
 
Katherine nodded enthusiastically. ﬁLike a floc
k of birds or a school of fish moving as 
one. We call it convergence or entanglement.ﬂ 
 
Trish sensed her famous guest was star
ting to see the potential of metasystem 
programming in her own field of Noetics. ﬁMy 
software,ﬂ Trish explai
ned, ﬁwas designed 
to help government agencies better evaluate
 and respond appropriate
ly to wide-scale 
crisesŠpandemic diseases, national tragedies, terrorism, that sort of thing.ﬂ She paused. 
ﬁOf course, there™s always the potential that 
it could be used in other directions . . . 
perhaps to take a snapshot of the national 
mind-set and predict the outcome of a national 
election or the direction the stock ma
rket will move at the opening bell.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSounds powerful.ﬂ 
 
Trish motioned to her big house. ﬁThe 
government
 thought so.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s gray eyes focused in on 
her now. ﬁTrish, might I ask about the 
ethical
 
dilemma posed by your work?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat do you mean?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI mean you created a piece of software that
 can easily be abused. Those who possess it 
have access to powerful information not avai
lable to everyone. You didn™t feel any 
hesitation creating it?ﬂ 
 
Trish didn™t blink. ﬁAbsolutely 
not. My software is no differe
nt than say . . . a flight 
simulator program. Some users will practice 
flying first-aid missions into underdeveloped 
countries. Some users will practice flying passeng
er jets into skyscrapers. Knowledge is a 
tool, and like all tools, its impact
 is in the hands of the user.ﬂ 
 
Katherine sat back, looking impressed. ﬁS
o let me ask you a hypothetical question.ﬂ 
 
Trish suddenly sensed their conversation ha
d just turned into
 a job interview. 
 
Katherine reached down and picked up a tiny sp
eck of sand off the deck, holding it up for 
Trish to see. ﬁIt occurs to me
,ﬂ she said, ﬁthat your metasy
stems work essentially lets you 
calculate the weight of an entire sandy b
each . . . by weighing one grain at a time.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, basically that™s right.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAs you know, this little grain of sand has 
mass
. A very small mass, but mass 
nonetheless.ﬂ 
 
Trish nodded. 
 
ﬁAnd 
because
 this grain of sand has mass, it therefore exerts 
gravity
. Again, too small to 
feel, but there.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNow,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁif we 
take trillions of these sand gr
ains and let them attract one 
another to form . . . say, the 
moon,
 then their combined grav
ity is enough to move entire 
oceans and drag the tides back and forth across our planet.ﬂ 
 
Trish had no idea where this was heade
d, but she liked what she was hearing. 
 
ﬁSo let™s take a hypothetical,ﬂ Katherine sai
d, discarding the sand grain. ﬁWhat if I told 
you that a 
thought
 . . . any tiny idea that forms in your mind . . . actually has 
mass
? What 
if I told you that a 
thought is an actual 
thing,
 a measurable entity, with a measurable 
mass? A minuscule mass, of course, but 
mass
 nonetheless. What are the implications?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHypothetically speaking
?
 Well, the obvious implications ar
e . . . if a thought has mass, 
then a thought exerts gravity and can pull things toward it.ﬂ 
 
Katherine smiled. ﬁYou™re good. Now take it a 
step further. What happens if many 
people start focusing on the 
same
 thought? All the occurren
ces of that same thought 
begin to merge into one, and the cumulative 
mass of this thought begins to grow. And 
therefore, its gravity grows.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMeaning . . . if enough people begin thinking th
e same thing, then the gravitational force 
of that thought becomes tangible . . . and 
it exerts actual force.ﬂ Katherine winked. ﬁAnd 
it can have a measurable effect in our physical world.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 19 
 
 
 
Director Inoue Sato
 stood with her arms folded, her 
eyes locked skeptically on Langdon 
as she processed what he had just told her.
 ﬁHe said he wants you to unlock an ancient 
portal? What am I supposed to do with 
that,
 Professor?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shrugged weakly. He was feeling ill ag
ain and tried not to look down at his 
friend™s severed hand. ﬁThat™s exactly what he
 told me. An ancient portal . . . hidden 
somewhere in this building. I 
told him I knew of no portal.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThen why does he think 
you
 can find it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁObviously, he™s insane.ﬂ 
He said Peter would point the way.
 Langdon looked down at 
Peter™s upstretched finger, again feeling repul
sed by his captor™s sadi
stic play on words. 
Peter will point the way.
 Langdon had already permitted his eyes to follow the pointing 
finger up to the dome overhead. 
A portal? Up there? Insane.
 
 
ﬁThis man who called me,ﬂ Langdon told Sato, ﬁwas the 
only
 one who knew I was 
coming to the Capitol tonight, so whoever informed 
you
 I was here tonight, that™s your 
man. I recommendŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere I got my information is not your c
oncern,ﬂ Sato interrupt
ed, voice sharpening. 
ﬁMy top priority at the moment
 is to cooperate with this man, and I have information 
suggesting 
you
 are the only one who can give him what he wants.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd 
my
 top priority is to find my fr
iend,ﬂ Langdon replied, frustrated. 
 
Sato inhaled deeply, her patie
nce clearly being tested. ﬁIf 
we want to find Mr. Solomon, 
we have one course of action, ProfessorŠto
 start cooperating with
 the one person who 
seems to know where he is.ﬂ Sato checked he
r watch. ﬁOur time is limited. I can assure 
you it is imperative we comply with this man™s demands quickly.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow?ﬂ Langdon asked, incredulous. ﬁBy lo
cating and unlocking an ancient portal? 
There 
is
 no portal, Director Sat
o. This guy™s a lunatic.ﬂ 
 
Sato stepped close, less than a foot from
 Langdon. ﬁIf I may point this out . . . your 
lunatic
 deftly manipulated two fairly smart indi
viduals already this morning.ﬂ She stared 
directly at Langdon and then glanced at Anders
on. ﬁIn my business, one learns there is a 
fine line between insanity and genius. We would 
be wise to give this man a little respect.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe 
cut off
 a man™s hand!ﬂ 
 
ﬁMy point exactly. That is hardly the act 
of an uncommitted or uncertain individual. 
More important, Professor, this man obvious
ly believes you can help him. He brought 
you all the way to WashingtonŠand he
 must have done it for a reason.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe said the only reason he thinks 
I can unlock this ‚portal™ is that 
Peter
 told him I can 
unlock it,ﬂ Langdon countered. 
 
ﬁAnd why would Peter Solomon sa
y that if it weren™t true?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sure Peter said no such thing. And if 
he did, then he did so under duress. He was 
confused . . . or frightened.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes. It™s called interrogational torture, and it
™s quite effective. All the more reason Mr. 
Solomon would tell the truth.ﬂ 
Sato spoke as if she™d had 
personal experien
ce with this 
technique. ﬁDid he explain 
why
 Peter thinks you alone can
 unlock the portal?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shook his head. 
 
ﬁProfessor, if your reputations are correct, 
then you and Peter Solomon both share an 
interest in this sort of thi
ngŠsecrets, historical esoterica, 
mysticism, and so on. In all of 
your discussions with Peter, he never on
ce mentioned to you anything about a secret 
portal in Washington, D.C.?ﬂ 
 
Langdon could scarcely believe he was bei
ng asked this question by a high-ranking 
officer of the CIA. ﬁI™m certain of it. Peter a
nd I talk about some pre
tty arcane things, but 
believe me, I™d tell him to get his head examined if he ever told me there was an ancient 
portal hidden anywhere at all.
 Particularly one that leads to the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
She glanced up. ﬁI™m sorry? The man told you 
specifically
 what this portal leads to?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, but he didn™t have to.ﬂ
 Langdon motioned to the hand. ﬁThe Hand of the Mysteries 
is a formal invitation to pass through a my
stical gateway and acquire ancient secret 
knowledgeŠpowerful wisdom known as the Ancient 
Mysteries . . . or the lost wisdom of 
all the ages.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo you™ve 
heard
 of the secret he believes is hidden here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA lot of historians have heard of it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThen how can you say the 
portal does not exist?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWith respect, ma™am, we™ve all heard of th
e Fountain of Youth and Shangri-la, but that 
does not mean they exist.ﬂ 
 
The loud squawk of Anderson™
s radio interrupted them. 
 
ﬁChief?ﬂ the voice on the radio said. 
 
Anderson snatched his radio fr
om his belt. ﬁAnderson here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSir, we™ve completed a search of the gr
ounds. There™s no one here that fits the 
description. Any furt
her orders, sir?ﬂ 
 
Anderson shot a quick glance at Sato, clearl
y expecting a reprimand, but Director Sato 
seemed uninterested. Anderson moved away
 from Langdon and Sato, speaking quietly 
into his radio. 
 
Sato™s unwavering focus remained on Langdon. ﬁY
ou™re saying the secret he believes is 
hidden in Washington . . . is a 
fantasy
?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁA very old myth. The secret of
 the Ancient Mysteries is pre-Christian, 
actually. Thousands of years old.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd yet it™s 
still
 around?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAs are many equally improbable beliefs.ﬂ 
Langdon often reminded his students that 
most modern religions included stories that
 did not hold up to scientific scrutiny: 
everything from Moses parting the Red Sea . 
. . to Joseph Smith using magic eyeglasses 
to translate the Book of Morm
on from a series of gold plat
es he found buried in upstate 
New York. 
Wide acceptance of an idea is not proof of its validity.
 
 
ﬁI see. So what exactly 
are
 these . . . Ancient Mysteries?ﬂ 
 
Langdon exhaled. 
Have you got a few weeks?
 ﬁIn short, the Ancient Mysteries refer to a 
body of secret knowledge that was amassed 
long ago. One intriguing aspect of this 
knowledge is that it allegedly en
ables its practitioners to acce
ss powerful abilities that lie 
dormant in the human mind. The enlightened
 Adepts who possessed this knowledge 
vowed to keep it veiled from the masses b
ecause it was considered far too potent and 
dangerous for the uninitiated.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDangerous in what way?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe information was kept hidden for the sa
me reason we keep matches from children. In 
the correct hands, fire can provide illuminati
on . . . but in the wrong hands, fire can be 
highly destructive.ﬂ 
 
Sato took off her glasses and studied him.
 ﬁTell me, Professor, do you believe such 
powerful information could truly exist?ﬂ 
 
Langdon was not sure how to respond. The An
cient Mysteries had always been the 
greatest paradox of his academic career. Virt
ually every mystical tradition on earth 
revolved around the idea that there existed 
arcane knowledge capable of imbuing humans 
with mystical, almost god
like, powers: tarot and 
I Ching
 gave men the ability to see the 
future; alchemy gave men immortality th
rough the fabled Philosopher™s Stone; Wicca 
permitted advanced practitioners to cast 
powerful spells. The list went on and on. 
 
As an academic, Langdon could not deny the hist
orical record of these traditionsŠtroves 
of documents, artifacts, and artwork that, i
ndeed, clearly suggeste
d the ancients had a 
powerful wisdom that they shared only th
rough allegory, myths, and symbols, ensuring 
that only those properly initiated could access 
its power. Nonetheless,
 as a realist and a 
skeptic, Langdon remained unconvinced. 
 
ﬁLet™s just say I™m a skeptic,ﬂ he told Sato. 
ﬁI have never seen anything in the real world 
to suggest the Ancient Mysteries are 
anything other than legendŠa recurring 
mythological archetype. It seem
s to me that if it were 
possible
 for humans to acquire 
miraculous powers, there would be evidence. And yet, so far, histor
y has given us no men 
with superhuman powers.ﬂ 
 
Sato arched her eyebrows. ﬁThat™s not entirely true.ﬂ 
 
Langdon hesitated, realizing that for many religi
ous people, there was indeed a precedent 
for human gods, Jesus being the most obvious. ﬁA
dmittedly,ﬂ he said, ﬁthere are plenty of 
educated people who believe this empoweri
ng wisdom truly exists, but I™m not yet 
convinced.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIs Peter Solomon one of those people?ﬂ Sa
to asked, glancing toward the hand on the 
floor. 
 
Langdon could not bring himself to look at the 
hand. ﬁPeter comes from a family lineage 
that has always had a passion for al
l things ancient and mystical.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWas that a yes?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
ﬁI can assure you that even if Peter belie
ves the Ancient Mysteries are real, he does 
not
 
believe they are accessible through some kind 
of portal hidden in Washington, D.C. He 
understands metaphorical symbolism, which 
is something his captor apparently does 
not.ﬂ 
 
Sato nodded. ﬁSo you believe this portal is a 
metaphor
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁIn theory, a
nyway. It™s a very common metaphorŠa 
mystical portal through which one must tr
avel to become enlightened. Portals and 
doorways are common symbolic constructs that 
represent transformative rites of passage. 
To look for a 
literal
 portal would be like 
trying to locate the actual Gates of Heaven.ﬂ 
 
Sato seemed to consider this momentar
ily. ﬁBut it sounds like Mr. Solomon™s captor 
believes you can unlock an 
actual
 portal.ﬂ 
 
Langdon exhaled. ﬁHe™s made the same error many zealots makeŠconfusing metaphor 
with a literal reality.ﬂ Similarly, early alchemists
 had toiled in vain to transform lead into 
gold, never realizing that lead
-to-gold was nothing but a me
taphor for tapping into true 
human potentialŠthat of taking a dull, ignora
nt mind and transforming it into a bright, 
enlightened one. 
 
Sato motioned to the hand. ﬁIf this man wants 
you to locate some kind of portal for him, 
why wouldn™t he simply 
tell
 you how to find it? Why all th
e dramatics? Why give you a 
tattooed hand?ﬂ 
 
Langdon had asked himself the same question and the answer was unsettling. ﬁWell, it 
seems the man we are dealing with, in addition 
to being mentally unstable, is also highly 
educated. This hand is proof that he is well ve
rsed in the Mysteries as well as their codes 
of secrecy. Not to mention with
 the history of this room.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t understand.ﬂ 
 
ﬁEverything he has done tonight was done in 
perfect accordance with ancient protocols. 
Traditionally, the Hand of the Mysteries is a sa
cred invitation, and therefore it must be 
presented in a sacred place.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s eyes narrowed. ﬁThis is the Rotunda of
 the U.S. Capitol Building, Professor, not 
some sacred shrine to ancient mystical secrets.ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, ma™am,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁI know a 
great number of historians who would 
disagree with you.ﬂ 
 
At that moment, across town, Trish Dunne wa
s seated in the glow of the plasma wall 
inside the Cube. She finished preparing her 
search spider and t
yped in the five key 
phrases Katherine had given her. 
 
Here goes nothing.
 
 
Feeling little optimism, she launched the sp
ider, effectively commencing a worldwide 
game of Go Fish. At blinding speed, the phras
es were now being compared to texts all 
over the world . . . looking for a perfect match. 
 
Trish couldn™t help but wonder what this wa
s all about, but she had come to accept that 
working with the Solomons meant neve
r quite knowing th
e entire story. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 20 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 stole an anxious glance at his wr
istwatch: 7:58 P.M. The smiling face 
of Mickey Mouse did little to cheer him up. 
I™ve got to find Peter. We™re wasting time.
 
 
Sato had stepped aside for a moment to ta
ke a phone call, but now she returned to 
Langdon. ﬁProfessor, am I keeping you from something?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, ma™am,ﬂ Langdon said, pulling his sleeve do
wn over his watch. ﬁI™m just extremely 
concerned about Peter.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can understand, but I assure 
you the best thing you can do to help Peter is to help me 
understand the mind-set of his captor.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was not so sure, but he sensed he wa
s not going anywhere until the OS director 
got the information she desired. 
 
ﬁA moment ago,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁyou su
ggested this Rotunda is somehow 
sacred
 to the idea 
of these Ancient Mysteries?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExplain that to me.ﬂ 
 
Langdon knew he would have to choose his wo
rds sparingly. He had taught for entire 
semesters on the mystical symbolism of Wa
shington, D.C., and there was an almost 
inexhaustible list of mystical references in this building alone. 
 
America has a hidden past.
 
 
Every time Langdon lectured on the symbol
ogy of America, his students were 
confounded to learn that the 
true
 intentions of our nation™s forefathers had absolutely 
nothing to do with what so many politicians now claimed. 
 
America™s intended destiny has been lost to history.
 
 
The forefathers who founded this
 capital city first named 
her ﬁRome.ﬂ They had named 
her river the Tiber and erected a classical cap
ital of pantheons and 
temples, all adorned 
with images of history™s great gods a
nd goddessesŠApollo, Minerva, Venus, Helios, 
Vulcan, Jupiter. In her center, as in many of
 the great classical cities, the founders had 
erected an enduring tribute to
 the ancientsŠthe Egyptian ob
elisk. This obelisk, larger 
even than Cairo™s or Alexandria™s, rose 555 f
eet into the sky, more than thirty stories, 
proclaiming thanks and honor to the demigod fo
refather for whom this
 capital city took 
its newer name. 
 
Washington.
 
 
Now, centuries later, despite America™s se
paration of church a
nd state, this state-
sponsored Rotunda glistened with ancient re
ligious symbolism. There were over a dozen 
different gods in the RotundaŠmore than the original Pantheon in Rome. Of course, the 
Roman Pantheon had been converted 
to Christianity in 609 . . . but 
this
 pantheon was 
never converted; vestiges of its true 
history still remained in plain view. 
 
ﬁAs you may know,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁthis Rotunda was designed as a tribute to one of 
Rome™s most venerated mystical 
shrines. The Temple of Vesta.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAs in the vestal virgins?ﬂ Sato looked doubt
ful that Rome™s virginal guardians of the 
flame had anything to do with the U.S. Capitol Building. 
 
ﬁThe Temple of Vesta in Rome,ﬂ Langdon sai
d, ﬁwas circular, with a gaping hole in the 
floor, through which the sacred fire of en
lightenment could be 
tended by a sisterhood of 
virgins whose job it was to ensu
re the flame never went out.ﬂ 
 
Sato shrugged. ﬁThis Rotunda is a circle
, but I see no gaping hole in this floor.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, not anymore, but for years the center of
 this room had a large opening precisely 
where Peter™s hand is now.ﬂ Langdon motioned to
 the floor. ﬁIn fact, you can still see the 
marks in the floor from the railing 
that kept people from falling in.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ Sato demanded, scrutinizing 
the floor. ﬁI™ve never heard that.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLooks like he™s right.ﬂ Anderson pointed out 
the circle of iron nubs
 where the posts had 
once been. ﬁI™ve seen these before, but I 
never had any idea why they were there.ﬂ 
 
You™re not alone,
 Langdon thought, imagining the t
housands of people every day, 
including famous lawmakers, who strode ac
ross the center of the Rotunda having no idea 
there was once a day when they would have
 plunged down into the Capitol CryptŠthe 
level beneath the Rotunda floor. 
 
ﬁThe hole in the floor,ﬂ Langdon told them
, ﬁwas eventually covered, but for a good 
while, those who visited the Rotunda could s
ee straight down to the fire that burned 
below.ﬂ 
 
Sato turned. ﬁFire? In the U.S. Capitol?ﬂ  
 
ﬁMore of a large torch, actuallyŠan eternal 
flame that burned in the crypt directly 
beneath us. It was supposed to be visible th
rough the hole in the floor, making this room 
a modern Temple of Vesta. This building 
even had its own vestal virginŠa federal 
employee called the Keeper of the CryptŠw
ho successfully kept the flame burning for 
fifty years, until politics, religion, an
d smoke damage snuffed out the idea.ﬂ 
 
Both Anderson and Sato looked surprised. 
 
Nowadays, the only reminder that a flame once burned here was the four-pointed star 
compass embedded in the crypt floor one st
ory below themŠa symbol of America™s 
eternal flame, which once shed illumination to
ward the four corners of the New World. 
 
ﬁSo, Professor,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁyour contention is
 that the man who left Peter™s hand here 
knew
 all this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁClearly. And much, much more. There are sy
mbols all over this room that reflect a 
belief in the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSecret wisdom,ﬂ Sato said with more than
 a hint of sarcasm in
 her voice. ﬁKnowledge 
that lets men acquire godlike powers?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat hardly fits with the Christia
n underpinnings of this country.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo it would seem, but it™s true. This tran
sformation of man into God is called 
apotheosis.
 Whether or not you™re aware of it, 
this themeŠtransforming man into godŠ
is the core element in this Rotunda™s symbolism.ﬂ 
 
ﬁApotheosis?ﬂ Anderson spun with
 a startled look
 of recognition. 
 
ﬁYes.ﬂ 
Anderson works here. He knows.
 ﬁThe word 
apotheosis
 literally means ‚divine 
transformation™Šthat of man becoming 
God. It™s from the ancient Greek: 
apo
Š‚to 
become,™ 
theos
Š‚god.™ ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked amazed. ﬁ
Apotheosis
 means ‚to become God™? I had no idea.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat am I missing?ﬂ Sato demanded. 
 
ﬁMa™am,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁthe largest painting in this building is called 
The Apotheosis of 
Washington.
 And it clearly depicts George Washington being 
transformed
 into a god.ﬂ 
 
Sato looked doubtful. ﬁI™ve never 
seen anything of the sort.ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, I™m sure you 
have
.ﬂ Langdon raised his index fing
er, pointing straight up. ﬁIt™s 
directly over your head.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 21 
 
 
 
The Apotheosis
 of Washington
Ša 4,664-square-foot fresco th
at covers the canopy of the 
Capitol RotundaŠwas completed in 1865 by Constantino Brumidi. 
 
Known as ﬁThe Michelangelo of the Capito
l,ﬂ Brumidi had laid claim to the Capitol 
Rotunda in the same way Michelangelo had la
id claim to the Sis
tine Chapel, by painting 
a fresco on the room™s most lofty canvasŠth
e ceiling. Like Michel
angelo, Brumidi had 
done some of his finest work inside the 
Vatican. Brumidi, however, immigrated to 
America in 1852, abandoning God™s largest shrine
 in favor of a new shrine, the U.S. 
Capitol, which now glistened with examples of his masteryŠfrom the trompe l™oeil of 
the Brumidi Corridors to the frieze ceiling of
 the Vice President™s Room. And yet it was 
the enormous image hovering above the Capitol 
Rotunda that most historians considered 
to be Brumidi™s masterwork. 
 
Robert Langdon gazed up at the massive fr
esco that covered the ceiling. He usually 
enjoyed his students™ startled reactions to this
 fresco™s bizarre imagery, but at the moment 
he simply felt trapped in a night
mare he had yet to understand. 
 
Director Sato was standing next to him w
ith her hands on her hips, frowning up at the 
distant ceiling. Langdon sensed she was having the same reaction many had when they 
first stopped to examine the painting at the core of their nation. 
 
Utter confusion. 
 
You™re not alone,
 Langdon thought. For most people, 
The Apotheosis of Washington
 got 
stranger and stranger the longer they looked 
at it. ﬁThat™s George Washington on the 
central panel,ﬂ Langdon said, poi
nting 180 feet upward into th
e middle of the dome. ﬁAs 
you can see, he™s dressed in 
white robes, attended by thirt
een maidens, and ascending on 
a cloud above mortal man. This is the moment 
of his apotheosis . . . his transformation 
into a god.ﬂ 
 
Sato and Anderson said nothing. 
 
ﬁNearby,ﬂ Langdon continued, ﬁyou can see a stra
nge, anachronistic series of figures: 
ancient gods presenting our forefathers w
ith advanced knowledge. There™s Minerva 
giving technological inspiration to our nati
on™s great inventorsŠBe
n Franklin, Robert 
Fulton, Samuel Morse.ﬂ Langdon pointed them
 out one by one. ﬁAnd over there is 
Vulcan helping us build a steam engine. Besi
de them is Neptune demonstrating how to 
lay the transatlantic cable. Besi
de that is Ceres, goddess of 
grain and root of our word 
cereal;
 she™s sitting on the McCormick reaper, th
e farming breakthrough that enabled this 
country to become a world leader in food 
production. The painting qui
te overtly portrays 
our forefathers receiving great wisdom from 
the gods.ﬂ He lowered his head, looking at 
Sato now. ﬁKnowledge is power, and the 
right
 knowledge lets man perform miraculous, 
almost godlike tasks.ﬂ 
 
Sato dropped her gaze back down to Langdon and rubbed her neck. ﬁLaying a phone 
cable is a far cry from being a god.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPerhaps to a 
modern
 man,ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁBut if Ge
orge Washington knew that we 
had become a race that possessed the power to 
speak to one another across oceans, fly at 
the speed of sound, and set foot on our moon, he
 would assume that we had become gods, 
capable of miraculous tasks.ﬂ He paused. ﬁIn 
the words of futurist 
Arthur C. Clarke, ‚Any 
sufficiently advanced technology is 
indistinguishable from magic.™ ﬂ 
 
Sato pursed her lips, apparently deep in 
thought. She glanced down at the hand, and then 
followed the direction of the outstretched i
ndex finger up into the dome. ﬁProfessor, you 
were told, ‚Peter will point the way.™ Is that correct?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁChief,ﬂ Sato said, turning away from Langdon, ﬁcan you get us a closer look at the 
painting?ﬂ  
 
Anderson nodded. ﬁThere™s a catwalk around th
e interior of the dome.ﬂ Langdon looked 
way, way up to the tiny railing visible just 
beneath the painting and felt his body go rigid. 
ﬁThere™s no need to go up there.ﬂ He had e
xperienced that seldom-visited catwalk once 
before, as the guest of a U.S. senator and hi
s wife, and he had almost fainted from the 
dizzying height and perilous walkway. 
 
ﬁNo need?ﬂ Sato demanded. ﬁProfessor, we ha
ve a man who believes 
this room contains 
a portal that has the pote
ntial to make him a god; we have a ceiling fresco that symbolizes 
the transformation of a man into a god; and 
we have a hand pointi
ng straight at that 
painting. It seems everything is urging us 
upward.
ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually,ﬂ Anderson interjected, glancing up, 
ﬁnot many people know this, but there is 
one
 hexagonal coffer in the dome that actua
lly swings open like a portal, and you can 
peer down through it andŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWait a second,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁyou™re missing 
the point. The portal this man is looking 
for is a 
figurative
 portalŠa gateway that doesn™t exis
t. When he said, ‚Peter will point 
the way,™ he was talking in metaphorical te
rms. This pointing-hand gestureŠwith its 
index finger 
and
 thumb extended upwardŠis a we
ll-known symbol of the Ancient 
Mysteries, and it appears all ove
r the world in ancient art. This same gesture appears in 
three of Leonardo da Vinci™s most famous encoded masterpiecesŠ
The Last Supper, 
Adoration of the Magi,
 and 
Saint John the Baptist.
 It™s a symbol of man™s mystical 
connection to God.ﬂ 
As above, so below.
 The madman™s bizarre choice of words was 
starting to feel more relevant now. 
 
ﬁI™ve never seen it before,ﬂ Sato said. 
 
Then watch ESPN,
 Langdon thought, always amused to 
see professional athletes point 
skyward in gratitude to God after a t
ouchdown or home run. He wondered how many 
knew they were continuing a pre-Christia
n mystical tradition of acknowledging the 
mystical power above, which, for one brief moment, had transformed them into a god 
capable of miraculous feats. 
 
ﬁIf it™s of any help,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁPeter™s ha
nd is not the first such hand to make an 
appearance in this Rotunda.ﬂ 
 
Sato eyed him like he was insane. ﬁI beg your pardon?ﬂ 
 
Langdon motioned to her BlackBerry. ﬁGoogl
e ‚George Washington Zeus.™ ﬂ  
 
Sato looked uncertain but started typing. A
nderson inched toward her, looking over her 
shoulder intently. 
 
Langdon said, ﬁThis Rotunda was once dominat
ed by a massive sculpture of a bare-
chested George Washington . . . depicted as a 
god. He sat in the same exact pose as Zeus 
in the Pantheon, bare chest exposed, left ha
nd holding a sword, right hand raised with 
thumb and finger extended.ﬂ 
 
Sato had apparently found an online image, because Anderson was staring at her 
BlackBerry in shock. ﬁHold on, 
that™s
 George Washington?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁDepicted as Zeus.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLook at his hand,ﬂ Anderson said, still peering 
over Sato™s shoulder. ﬁHis right hand is 
in the same exact position as Mr. Solomon™s.ﬂ 
 
As I said,
 Langdon thought, 
Peter™s hand is not the first 
to make an appearance in this 
room.
 When Horatio Greenough™s statue of 
a naked George Wa
shington was first 
unveiled in the Rotunda, many joked that Wa
shington must be reaching skyward in a 
desperate attempt to find some clothes. As
 American religious ideals changed, however, 
the joking criticism turned to controversy, and 
the statue was removed, banished to a shed 
in the east garden. Currently, it made its hom
e at the Smithsonian™s National Museum of 
American History, where those who saw it had no
 reason to suspect that it was one of the 
last vestigial links to a time when the father
 of the country had watched over the U.S. 
Capitol as a god . . . like Zeus watching over the Pantheon. 
 
Sato began dialing a number on her BlackBerr
y, apparently seeing th
is as an opportune 
moment to check in with her staff. ﬁWhat ha
ve you got?ﬂ She listened 
patiently. ﬁI see . . 
.ﬂ She glanced directly at Langdon, then at 
Peter™s hand. ﬁYou™re ce
rtain?ﬂ She listened a 
moment longer. ﬁOkay, thanks.ﬂ She hung 
up and turned back toward Langdon. ﬁMy 
support staff did some research and confirms 
the existence of your so-called Hand of the 
Mysteries, corroborating everything you said: fi
ve fingertip markingsŠthe star, the sun, 
the key, the crown, and the lanter
nŠas well as the fact that this hand served as an ancient 
invitation to learn 
secret wisdom.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m glad,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁDon™t be,ﬂ she replied curtl
y. ﬁIt appears we™re now at 
a dead end until you share 
whatever it is you™re 
still not telling me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMa™am?ﬂ 
 
Sato stepped toward him. ﬁWe™ve come full 
circle, Professor. You™
ve told me nothing I 
could not have learned from 
my own staff. And so I w
ill ask you once more. Why were 
you brought here tonight? What makes 
you so special? What is it that 
you
 alone know?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe™ve been through this,ﬂ Langdon fired b
ack. ﬁI don™t know why this guy thinks I 
know anything at all!ﬂ 
 
Langdon was half tempted to demand how the hell 
Sato
 knew that he was in the Capitol 
tonight, but they™d be
en through that, too. 
Sato isn™t talking.
 ﬁIf I knew the next step,ﬂ he 
told her, ﬁI™d tell you. But I don™t. Traditi
onally, the Hand of the My
steries is extended by 
a teacher to a student. And then, shortly afte
rward, the hand is followed up with a set of 
instructions . . . directions to a temple
, the name of the master who will teach youŠ
something
! But all this guy left for us is five
 tattoos! HardlyŠﬂ Langdon stopped short. 
 
Sato eyed him. ﬁWhat is it?ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s eyes shot back to the hand. 
Five tattoos.
 He now realized that what he was 
saying might not be entirely true. 
 
ﬁProfessor?ﬂ Sato pressed. 
 
Langdon inched toward the gruesome object. 
Peter will point the way.
 
 
ﬁEarlier, it crossed my mind that maybe this 
guy had left an object 
clenched in Peter™s 
palmŠa map, or a letter, or
 a set of directions.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe didn™t,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁAs you can see,
 those three fingers are not clenched 
tightly.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re right,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁBut
 it occurs to me . . .ﬂ He
 crouched down now, trying to 
see up under the fingers to the hidden part of 
Peter™s palm. ﬁMaybe it™s not written on 
paper.ﬂ 
 
ﬁTattooed?ﬂ Anderson said. 
 
Langdon nodded. 
 
ﬁDo you see anything on the palm?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
Langdon crouched lower, trying to peer up unde
r the loosely clenched fingers. ﬁThe 
angle is impossible. I can™tŠﬂ 
 
ﬁOh, for heaven™s sake,ﬂ Sato said, moving 
toward him. ﬁJust open the damned thing!ﬂ 
 
Anderson stepped in front of her. ﬁMa™am! We
 should really wait for forensics before we 
touchŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI want some answers,ﬂ Sato said, pu
shing past him. She crouched down, edging 
Langdon away from the hand. 
 
Langdon stood up and watched in disbelief as Sa
to pulled a pen from her pocket, sliding 
it carefully under the three clenched finge
rs. Then, one by one, she pried each finger 
upward until the hand stood fully 
open, with its palm visible. 
 
She glanced up at Langdon, and a thin smile spread across her face. ﬁRight again, 
Professor.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 22 
 
 
 
Pacing the
 library, Katherine Solomon pulled ba
ck the sleeve of her lab coat and 
checked her watch. She was not a woman accust
omed to waiting, but at the moment, she 
felt as if her whole world were on hold. She 
was waiting for Trish™s search-spider results, 
she was waiting for word from her brother, 
and also, she was waiting for a callback from 
the man who was responsible for th
is entire troubling situation. 
 
I wish he hadn™t told me,
 she thought. Normally, Katherin
e was extremely careful about 
making new acquaintances, and although she had 
met this man for the first time only this 
afternoon, he had earned her tr
ust in a matter of minutes. 
Completely
. 
 
His call had come this afternoon while Ka
therine was at home enjoying her usual 
Sunday-afternoon pleasure of
 catching up on the week™s scientific journals. 
 
ﬁMs. Solomon?ﬂ an unusually airy voi
ce had said. ﬁMy name is Dr. Christopher 
Abaddon. I was hoping I might speak to you for a moment about your brother?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry, 
who
 is this?ﬂ she had demanded. 
And how did you get my private cell-phone 
number?
 
 
ﬁDr. Christopher Abaddon?ﬂ 
 
Katherine did not recognize the name. 
 
The man cleared his throat, as if the situa
tion had just become awkward. ﬁI apologize, 
Ms. Solomon. I was under the impression your brother had told you about me. I™m his 
doctor. Your cell number was listed as his emergency contact.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s heart skipped. 
Emergency contact?
 ﬁIs something wrong?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo . . . I don™t think so,ﬂ the man said. ﬁYour brother missed an appointment this 
morning, and I can™t reach him on any of 
his numbers. He never misses appointments 
without calling, and I™m ju
st a little worried. I hesi
tated to phone you, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, no, not at all, I appreciate the concern.ﬂ
 Katherine was still trying to place the 
doctor™s name. ﬁI haven™t spoken to my brothe
r since yesterday morning, but he probably 
just forgot to turn on his cell.ﬂ Katherine 
had recently given him a new iPhone, and he 
still hadn™t taken the time to
 figure out how to use it. 
 
ﬁYou say you™re his 
doctor
?ﬂ she asked. 
Does Peter have an illness he™s keeping from 
me?
 
 
There was a weighty pause on the line. ﬁI™m te
rribly sorry, but I™ve obviously just made a 
rather serious professional 
error by calling you. Your brothe
r told me you were aware of 
his visits to me, but now I 
see that™s not the case.ﬂ 
 
My brother lied to his doctor?
 Katherine™s concern was now
 growing steadily. ﬁIs he 
sick?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry, Ms. Solomon, doctor-patient conf
identiality precludes me from discussing 
your brother™s condition, and I™ve already said
 too much by admitting he is my patient. 
I™m going to hang up now, but if you hear from him today, please ask him to call me so I 
know he™s okay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWait!ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁPlease te
ll me what™s wrong with Peter!ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon exhaled, sounding displeased with 
his mistake. ﬁMs. Solomon, I can hear 
you™re upset, and I don™t blame you. I™m sure your 
brother is fine. He was in my office 
just yesterday.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYesterday? And he™s
 scheduled again 
today
? This sounds urgent.ﬂ 
 
The man heaved a sigh. ﬁI suggest we give
 him a little more time before weŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m coming by your office right now,ﬂ Kather
ine said, heading for the door. ﬁWhere are 
you located?ﬂ 
 
Silence. 
 
ﬁDr. Christopher Abaddon?ﬂ Katherine said. 
ﬁI can look up your address myself, or you 
can simply give it to me. Either way, I™m coming over.ﬂ 
 
The doctor paused. ﬁIf I meet with you, 
Ms. Solomon, would you please do me the 
courtesy of saying nothing to your brothe
r until I™ve had a chance to explain my 
misstep?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s fine.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you. My office is in Kalorama He
ights.ﬂ He gave her an address. 
 
Twenty minutes later, Katherine Solomon was 
navigating the stately streets of Kalorama 
Heights. She had phoned all of her brother™s 
numbers with no reply. She did not feel 
overly concerned about her brothe
r™s whereabouts, and yet, the news that he was secretly 
seeing a doctor . . . was troubling. 
 
When Katherine finally located the address, 
she stared up at the building in confusion. 
This is a doctor™s office?
 
 
The opulent mansion before her had a wrought-i
ron security fence, electronic cameras, 
and lush grounds. As she slowed to double-check
 the address, one of the security cameras 
rotated toward her, and the gate swu
ng open. Tentatively, Katherine drove up the 
driveway and parked next to a si
x-car garage and a stretch limo. 
 
What kind of doctor
 is 
this guy?
 
 
As she got out of her car, the front door 
of the mansion opened, and an elegant figure 
drifted out onto the landing. He was handsom
e, exceptionally tall, and younger than she 
had imagined. Even so, he projected the s
ophistication and polish of an older man. He 
was impeccably dressed in a dark suit and tie, and his thick blond hair was immaculately 
coiffed. 
 
ﬁMs. Solomon, I™m Dr. Christopher Abaddon,ﬂ 
he said, his voice a breathy whisper. 
When they shook hands, his skin felt smooth and well tended. 
 
ﬁKatherine Solomon,ﬂ she said, trying not 
to stare at his skin, which was unusually 
smooth and bronzed. 
Is he wearing makeup?
 
 
Katherine felt a growing disquiet as she st
epped into the home™s 
beautifully appointed 
foyer. Classical music played softly in th
e background, and it smelled as if someone had 
burned incense. ﬁThis is lovely,ﬂ
 she said, ﬁalthough I expected more of . . . an office.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m fortunate to work out of my home.ﬂ Th
e man led her into a living room, where there 
was a crackling fire. ﬁPlease make yourself comf
ortable. I™m just steeping some tea. I™ll 
bring it out, and we can talk.ﬂ He stro
de toward the kitchen and disappeared. 
 
Katherine Solomon did not sit. Female intuiti
on was a potent instinct 
that she had learned 
to trust, and something about this place wa
s making her skin crawl. She saw nothing that 
looked anything like any doctor™s office she ha
d ever seen. The walls of this antique-
adorned living room were covered with classi
cal art, primarily paintings with strange 
mythical themes. She paused before a la
rge canvas depicting the Three Graces, whose 
nude bodies were spectacularly 
rendered in vivid colors. 
 
ﬁThat™s the original Michael Parkes oil.ﬂ 
Dr. Abaddon appeared w
ithout warning beside 
her, holding a tray of steaming tea. ﬁI thought 
we™d sit by the fire?ﬂ 
He led her over to the 
living room and offered her a seat. 
ﬁThere™s no reason to be nervous.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m not nervous,ﬂ Katherin
e said entirely too quickly. 
 
He gave her a reassuring smile. ﬁActually, 
it is my business to know when people are 
nervous.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI beg your pardon?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m a practicing psychiatrist, Ms. Solomon. Th
at is my profession. I™ve been seeing your 
brother for almost a year
 now. I™m his therapist.ﬂ 
 
Katherine could only stare. 
My brother is in therapy?
 
 
ﬁPatients often choose to keep their therapy 
to themselves,ﬂ the man said. ﬁI made a 
mistake by calling you, although in my defe
nse, your brother did mislead me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI . . . I had no idea.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI apologize if I made yo
u nervous,ﬂ he said, soundi
ng embarrassed. ﬁI noticed you 
studying my face when we met, and yes, I 
do wear makeup.ﬂ He touched his own cheek, 
looking self-conscious. ﬁI have a dermatologi
cal condition, which I prefer to hide. My 
wife usually puts the makeup on for me, but when she™s not here, I have to rely on my 
own heavy touch.ﬂ 
 
Katherine nodded, too embarrassed to speak. 
 
ﬁAnd this lovely hair . . .ﬂ He touched hi
s lush blond mane. ﬁA wig. My skin condition 
affected my scalp follicles as well, and a
ll my hair jumped ship.ﬂ He shrugged. ﬁI™m 
afraid my one sin is vanity.ﬂ 
 
ﬁApparently 
mine
 is rudeness,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
ﬁNot at all.ﬂ Dr. Abaddon™s smile was disa
rming. ﬁShall we start over? Perhaps with 
some tea?ﬂ 
 
They sat in front of the fire and Abaddon poured tea. ﬁYour brother go
t me in the habit of 
serving tea during our sessions. He said
 the Solomons are tea drinkers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFamily tradition,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁBlack, please.ﬂ 
 
They sipped their tea and made small talk fo
r a few minutes, but Katherine was eager for 
information about her brother. ﬁWhy was 
my brother coming to you?ﬂ she asked. 
And 
why didn™t he tell me?
 Admittedly, Peter had endured more than his fair share of tragedy 
in his lifeŠlosing his father at a young age, a
nd then, within a span of five years, burying 
his only son and then his mother. Even s
o, Peter had always found a way to cope. 
 
Dr. Abaddon took a sip of tea. ﬁYour brother ca
me to me because he trusts me. We have 
a bond beyond that of normal patient and doc
tor.ﬂ He motioned to a framed document 
near the fireplace. It looked like a dipl
oma, until Katherine spied the double-headed 
phoenix. 
 
ﬁYou™re a Mason?ﬂ 
The highest degree, no less.
 
 
ﬁPeter and I are brothers of sorts.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou must have done something important to be
 invited into the thirty-third degree.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot really,ﬂ he said. ﬁI 
have family money, and I give a lot of money to Masonic 
charities.ﬂ 
 
Katherine now realized why her 
brother trusted this young doctor. 
A Mason with family 
money, interested in philant
hropy and ancient mythology?
 
 
Dr. Abaddon had more in common with her br
other than she had initially imagined. 
 
ﬁWhen I asked why my brother came to you,ﬂ 
she said, ﬁI didn™t mean why did he 
choose
 
you. I meant, why is he seeking th
e services of a psychiatrist?ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon smiled. ﬁYes, I know. I was trying 
to sidestep the question politely. It™s 
really not something I should be discu
ssing.ﬂ He paused. ﬁAlthough I must say I™m 
puzzled that your brother woul
d keep our discussions from 
you, considering that they 
relate so directly to your research.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMy research?ﬂ Katherine sa
id, taken totally off guard. 
My brother talks about my 
research?
 
 
ﬁRecently, your brother came to me looki
ng for a professional opinion about the 
psychological impact of the breakthroughs you are making in your lab.ﬂ 
 
Katherine almost choked on the tea. ﬁRea
lly? I™m . . . surpri
sed,ﬂ she managed. 
What is 
Peter thinking? He told his shrink about my work?!
 Their security protocol involved not 
discussing with 
anyone
 what Katherine was working on. 
Moreover, the confidentiality 
had been her brother™s idea. 
 
ﬁCertainly you are aware, Ms. 
Solomon, that your brother is 
deeply concerned about what 
will happen when your research goes public. He
 sees the potential for a significant 
philosophical shift in the worl
d . . . and he came here to discuss the possible ramifications 
. . . from a 
psychological
 perspective.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI see,ﬂ Katherine said, her 
teacup now shaking slightly. 
 
ﬁThe questions we discuss are challenging one
s: What happens to the human condition if 
the great mysteries of life are finally revealed
? What happens when t
hose beliefs that we 
accept on 
faith
 . . . are suddenly categorically proven as 
fact
? Or disproved as 
myth
? One 
could argue that there exist certain ques
tions that are best left unanswered.ﬂ 
 
Katherine could not believe wh
at she was hearing, and yet 
she kept her emotions in 
check. ﬁI hope you don™t mind, Dr. Abaddon, but I™d
 prefer not to discuss the details of 
my work. I have no immediate plans to ma
ke anything public. For the time being, my 
discoveries will remain safely locked in my lab.ﬂ 
 
ﬁInteresting.ﬂ Abaddon leaned back in his chai
r, lost in thought for a moment. ﬁIn any 
event, I asked your brother to come back t
oday because yesterday he suffered a bit of a 
break
. When that happens, I like to have clientsŠﬂ 
 
ﬁBreak?ﬂ Katherine™
s heart was pounding. 
ﬁ
As in breakdown?ﬂ She couldn™t imagine her 
brother breaking down over anything. 
 
Abaddon reached out kindly. ﬁPlease, I can see I™ve upset you. I™m sorry. Considering 
these awkward circumstances, I can understand 
how you might feel entitled to answers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhether I™m entitled or not,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁmy brother is all I have left of my family. 
Nobody knows him better than I do, so if you te
ll me what the hell happened, maybe I 
can help you. We all want the same thingŠwhat™s best for Peter.ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon fell silent for several long mome
nts and then began slowly nodding as if 
Katherine might have a point
. Finally, he spoke. ﬁFor the record, Ms. Solomon, if I 
decide to share this information with 
you, I would do so only because I think your 
insights might help me assist your brother.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ 
 
Abaddon leaned forward, putting his elbows on hi
s knees. ﬁMs. Solomon, as long as I™ve 
been seeing your brother, I™ve sensed in him a 
deep struggle with feelings of guilt. I™ve 
never pressed him on it because that™s not w
hy he comes to me. And yet yesterday, for a 
number of reasons, I finally asked him about
 it.ﬂ Abaddon locked eyes with her. ﬁYour 
brother opened up, rather dramatically and 
unexpectedly. He told me things I had not 
expected to hear . . . including everything 
that happened the night your mother died.ﬂ 
 
Christmas EveŠalmost exactly ten 
years ago. She died in my arms.
 
 
ﬁHe told me your mother was murdered dur
ing a robbery attempt 
at your home? A man 
broke in looking for something he 
believed your brother was hiding?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s correct.ﬂ 
 
Abaddon™s eyes were appraising her. ﬁYour 
brother said he shot the man dead?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes.ﬂ 
 
Abaddon stroked his chin. ﬁDo you recall what the intruder was looking for when he 
broke into your home?ﬂ 
 
Katherine had tried in vain for ten years to
 block out the memory. ﬁYes, his demand was 
very specific. Unfortunately, none of us 
knew what he was talking about. His demand 
never made sense to any of us.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, it made sense to your brother.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ Katherine sat up. 
 
ﬁAt least according to the stor
y he told me yesterday, Peter knew exactly what the 
intruder was looking for. And yet your brot
her did not want to hand it over, so he 
pretended not to understand.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s absurd. Peter couldn™t possibly have
 known what the man wanted. His demands 
made no sense!ﬂ 
 
ﬁInteresting.ﬂ Dr. Abaddon paused and t
ook a few notes. ﬁAs I mentioned, however, 
Peter told me he 
did
 know. Your brother believes if he had only cooperated with the 
intruder, maybe your mother would be alive t
oday. This decision is the source of all his 
guilt.ﬂ 
 
Katherine shook her head. 
ﬁThat™s crazy . . .ﬂ 
 
Abaddon slumped, looking troubled. ﬁMs. Solomon, 
this has been useful feedback. As I 
feared, your brother seems to have had a litt
le break with reality. I must admit, I was 
afraid this might be the case. That™s w
hy I asked him to come back today. These 
delusional episodes are not uncommon when 
they relate to traumatic memories.ﬂ 
 
Katherine shook her head again. ﬁPeter 
is far from delusional, Dr. Abaddon.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI would agree, except . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁExcept 
what
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁExcept that his recounting of the attack was 
just the beginning . . . a tiny fraction of the 
long and far-fetched tale he told me.ﬂ 
 
Katherine leaned forward in her 
seat. ﬁWhat did Peter tell you?ﬂ 
 
Abaddon gave a sad smile. ﬁMs. Solomon, le
t me ask you this. Has your brother ever 
discussed with you what he believes is hidden he
re in Washington, D.C. . . . or the role he 
believes he plays in protecting a great tr
easure . . . of lost ancient wisdom?ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s jaw fell open. ﬁWhat in 
the world are you talking about?ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon heaved a long sigh. ﬁWhat I am about to tell you will be a bit shocking, 
Katherine.ﬂ He paused and locked eyes with 
her. ﬁBut it will be im
measurably helpful if 
you can tell me 
anything
 you may know about it.ﬂ He reached for her cup. ﬁMore tea?ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 23 
 
 
 
Another tattoo.
 
 
Langdon crouched anxiously beside Peter™s 
open palm and examined the seven tiny 
symbols that had been hidden beneath the lifeless clenched fingers. 
 
 
 
ﬁThey appear to be numbers,ﬂ Langdon said, surprised. ﬁAlthough I don™t recognize 
them.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe first is a Roman 
numeral,ﬂ Anderson said. 
 
ﬁActually, I don™t think so,ﬂ
 Langdon corrected. ﬁThe Roma
n numeral I-I-I-X doesn™t 
exist. It would be written V-I-I.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow about the rest of it?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
ﬁI™m not sure. It looks like eight
-eight-five in Arabic numbers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁArabic?ﬂ Anderson asked. ﬁThey look like 
normal
 numbers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOur normal numbers 
are
 Arabic.ﬂ Langdon had become so accustomed to clarifying this 
point for his students that he™d
 actually prepared a lecture about the scientific advances 
made by early Middle Eastern cultures, one of
 them being our modern numbering system, 
whose advantages over Roman nu
merals included ‚positional 
notation™ and the invention 
of the number zero. Of course, Langdon always
 ended this lecture with a reminder that 
Arab culture had 
also
 given mankind the word 
al-kuhl
Šthe favorite beverage of Harvard 
freshmenŠknown as 
alcohol
. 
 
Langdon scrutinized the tattoo, feeling puzzled. 
ﬁAnd I™m not even sure about the eight-
eight-five. The rectilinear writing looks unusual. Those may not be numbers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThen what are they? Sato asked. 
 
ﬁI™m not sure. The whole tattoo looks almost . . . runic.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMeaning?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
ﬁRunic alphabets are composed solely of stra
ight lines. Their letter
s are called runes and 
were often used for carving in stone because curves were too difficult to chisel.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIf these are runes,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁwhat is their meaning?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shook his head. His expertise extended
 only to the most rudimentary runic 
alphabetŠFutharkŠa third-cent
ury Teutonic system, and this
 was not Futhark. ﬁTo be 
honest, I™m not even sure these are runes. 
You™d need to ask a specialist. There are 
dozens of different formsŠHälsi
nge, Manx, the ‚dotted™ StungnarŠﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter Solomon is a 
Mason, is he not?ﬂ  
 
Langdon did a double take. ﬁYes, but what does th
at have to do with this?ﬂ He stood up 
now, towering over the tiny woman. 
 
ﬁ
You
 tell me. You just said that runic alphabe
ts are used for stone carvings, and it is my 
understanding that the original Freemasons 
were stone craftsmen. I mention this only 
because when I asked my office to search for a connection between the Hand of the 
Mysteries and Peter Solomon, thei
r search returned one link in 
particular.ﬂ She paused, as 
if to emphasize the importance of her finding. ﬁThe Masons.ﬂ 
 
Langdon exhaled, fighting the impulse to tell Sato
 the same thing he constantly told his 
students: 
ﬁGoogleﬂ is not a synonym for ﬁresearch.ﬂ
 In these days of massive, 
worldwide keyword searches, it seemed ev
erything was linked to everything. The world 
was becoming one big entangled web of inform
ation that was getting denser every day. 
 
Langdon maintained a patient tone. ﬁI™m not surprised the Masons appeared in your 
staff™s search. Masons are a very obvious 
link between Peter Solomon and any number of 
esoteric topics.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁwhich is another reason 
I have been surprised this evening that you 
have not yet mentioned the Masons. After all,
 you™ve been talking 
about secret wisdom 
protected by an enlightened few. Th
at sounds very Masonic, does it not?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt does . . . and it also sounds very Rosi
crucian, Kabbalistic, Alumbradian, and any 
number of other esoteric groups.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut Peter Solomon is a MasonŠa very powerful Mason, at that. It seems the Masons 
would come to mind if we were talking a
bout secrets. Heaven knows the Masons love 
their secrets.ﬂ 
 
Langdon could hear the distrust in
 her voice, and he wanted no 
part of it. ﬁIf you want to 
know anything about the Masons, you would be
 far better served to ask a Mason.ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁI™d pref
er to ask someone I can trust.ﬂ 
 
Langdon found the comment both ignorant and offensive. ﬁFor the  
record, ma™am, the entire Masonic philosophy is built on honesty and integrity. Masons 
are among the most trustworthy men you could ever hope to meet.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI have seen persuasive 
evidence to the contrary.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was liking Director Sato less and le
ss with each passing moment. He had spent 
years writing about the Masons™ rich traditi
on of metaphorical iconography and symbols, 
and knew that Masons had always been 
one of the most unfairly maligned and 
misunderstood organizations in the world. Re
gularly accused of everything from devil 
worship to plotting a one-world government, 
the Masons also had a policy of never 
responding to their critics, whic
h made them an easy target. 
 
ﬁRegardless,ﬂ Sato said, he
r tone biting, ﬁwe are again 
at an impasse, Mr. Langdon. It 
seems to me there is either something 
you are missing . . . or something you are not 
telling me. The man we™re dealing with said
 that Peter Solomon chose you specifically.ﬂ 
She leveled a cold stare at 
Langdon. ﬁI think it™s time we mo
ve this conversation to CIA 
headquarters. Maybe we™ll have more luck there.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s threat barely registered with Langdon. Sh
e had just said something that had lodged 
in his mind. 
Peter Solomon chose you
. The comment, combined with the mention of 
Masons, had hit Langdon strangely. He looke
d down at the Masonic ring on Peter™s 
finger. The ring was one of Peter™s most pr
ized possessionsŠa Solomon family heirloom 
that bore the symbol of the double-headed
 phoenixŠthe ultimate mystical icon of 
Masonic wisdom. The gold glinted in the 
light, sparking an unexpected memory. 
 
Langdon gasped, recalling the eeri
e whisper of Peter™s captor: 
It really hasn™t dawned on 
you yet, has it? Why you were chosen?
 
 
Now, in one terrifying moment, Langdon™s t
houghts snapped into focus and the fog 
lifted. 
 
All at once, Langdon™s purpose 
here was crystal clear. 
 
Ten miles away, driving south on Suitland Parkway, Mal™akh heard a distinctive 
vibration on the seat beside him. It wa
s Peter Solomon™s iPhone, which had proven a 
powerful tool today. The visual caller ID 
now displayed the image of an attractive 
middle-aged woman with long black hair. 
 
INCOMING CALLŠKATHERINE SOLOMON 
 
Mal™akh smiled, igno
ring the call. 
Destiny pulls me closer.
 
 
He had lured Katherine Solomon to his home this afternoon for one reason onlyŠto 
determine if she had information that could as
sist him . . . perhaps a family secret that 
might help Mal™akh locate what he sought
. Clearly, however, Kath
erine™s brother had 
told her nothing of what he had 
been guarding all these years. 
 
Even so, Mal™akh had learned so
mething else from Katherine. 
Something that has earned 
her a few extra hours of life today.
 Katherine had confirmed for him that all of her 
research was in 
one
 location, safely locked inside her lab. 
 
I must destroy it.
 
 
Katherine™s research was poised to open 
a new door of understanding, and once the door 
was opened even a crack, others would follow. 
It would just be a matter of time before 
everything changed. 
I cannot let that happen. The world must
 stay as it is . . . adrift in 
ignorant darkness.
 
 
The iPhone beeped, indicating Katherine had 
left a voice mail. Mal™akh retrieved it. 
 
ﬁPeter, it™s me again.ﬂ Katherine™s voice s
ounded concerned. ﬁWhere
 are you? I™m still 
thinking about my conversation with Dr. Ab
addon . . . and I™m worried. Is everything 
okay? Please call me. I™m at the lab.ﬂ 
 
The voice mail ended. 
 
Mal™akh smiled. 
Katherine should worry less about her brother, and more about herself.
 
He turned off Suitland Parkway onto Silver Hi
ll Road. Less than a mile later, in the 
darkness, he spotted the faint outline of the 
SMSC nestled in the trees off the highway to 
his right. The entire complex was 
surrounded by a high razor-wire fence. 
 
A secure building?
 Mal™akh chuckled to himself. 
I know someone who will open the door 
for me.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 24 
 
 
 
The revelation
 crashed over Langdon like a wave. 
 
I know why I am here.
 
 
Standing in the center of the Rotunda, Langdon fe
lt a powerful urge to turn and run away 
. . . from Peter™s hand, from the shining gold ri
ng, from the suspicious eyes of Sato and 
Anderson. Instead, he stood dead still, clingi
ng more tightly to the leather daybag that 
hung on his shoulder. 
I™ve got to get out of here.
 
 
His jaw clenched as his memory began replay
ing the scene from that
 cold morning, years 
ago in Cambridge. It was six A.M. and Langdon 
was entering his classroom as he always 
did following his ritual morning laps in the Harvard Pool. The familiar smells of chalk 
dust and steam heat greeted him as he crosse
d the threshold. He took 
two steps toward his 
desk but stopped short. 
 
A figure was waiting there for himŠan elegant 
gentleman with an aquiline face and regal 
gray eyes. 
 
ﬁPeter?ﬂ Langdon stared in shock. 
 
Peter Solomon™s smile flashed white in 
the dimly lit room. ﬁGood morning, Robert. 
Surprised to see me?ﬂ His voice was so
ft, and yet there was power there.  
 
Langdon hurried over and warmly shook his frie
nd™s hand. ﬁWhat in the world is a Yale 
blue blood doing on the Crimson campus before dawn?ﬂ 
 
ﬁCovert mission behind enemy lines,ﬂ So
lomon said, laughing. He motioned to 
Langdon™s trim waistline. ﬁLaps are paying off. You™re in good shape.ﬂ 
 
ﬁJust trying to make you feel old,ﬂ Langdon said
, toying with him. ﬁI
t™s great to see you, 
Peter. What™s up?ﬂ 
 
ﬁShort business trip,ﬂ the man replied, gl
ancing around the deserted classroom. ﬁI™m 
sorry to drop in on you like this, Robert
, but I have only a few minutes. There™s 
something I needed to ask you . . . in person. A favor.ﬂ 
 
That™s a first.
 Langdon wondered what a simple colle
ge professor could possibly do for 
the man who had everything. ﬁAnything at all,ﬂ 
he replied, pleased for any opportunity to 
do something for someone who had given him so
 much, especially wh
en Peter™s life of 
good fortune had also been marred by so much tragedy. 
 
Solomon lowered his voice. ﬁI was hoping 
you would consider looking after something 
for me.ﬂ 
 
Langdon rolled his eyes. ﬁNot Hercules, I 
hope.ﬂ Langdon had once agreed to take care 
of Solomon™s hundred-fifty-pound mastiff, Herc
ules, during Solomon™s travels. While at 
Langdon™s home, the dog apparently had become homesick for his favorite leather chew 
toy and had located a worthy 
substitute in Langdon™s st
udyŠan original vellum, hand-
calligraphed, illuminated Bible from the 
1600s. Somehow ﬁbad dogﬂ didn™t quite seem 
adequate. 
 
ﬁYou know, I™m still searching for a replacem
ent,ﬂ Solomon said, smiling sheepishly. 
 
ﬁForget it. I™m glad Hercules
 got a taste of religion.ﬂ 
 
Solomon chuckled but seemed distracted. ﬁRobe
rt, the reason I came to see you is I™d like 
you to keep an eye on something that is quite 
valuable to me. I inherited it a while back, 
but I™m no longer comfortable leaving 
it in my home or in my office.ﬂ 
 
Langdon immediately felt uncomfortable. Anythi
ng ﬁquite valuableﬂ in Peter Solomon™s 
world had to be worth an absolute fo
rtune. ﬁHow about a safe-deposit box?ﬂ 
Doesn™t 
your family have stock in 
half the banks in America?
 
 
ﬁThat would involve paperwork and bank empl
oyees; I™d prefer a trusted friend. And I 
know you can keep secrets.ﬂ Solomon reached
 in his pocket and pulled out a small 
package, handing it to Langdon. 
 
Considering the dramatic preamble, Langdon ha
d expected something more impressive. 
The package was a small cube-shaped box, about
 three inches square, wrapped in faded 
brown packing paper and tied with twine. Fr
om the package™s heavy weight and size, it 
felt like its contents must be rock or metal. 
This is it?
 Langdon turned the box in his 
hands, now noticing the twine ha
d been carefully secured on one side with an embossed 
wax seal, like an ancient edict. The seal
 bore a double-headed phoenix with the number 
33 emblazoned on its chestŠthe traditional symbol of the highest degree of 
Freemasonry. 
 
ﬁReally, Peter,ﬂ Langdon said, a lopsided gr
in creeping across his face. ﬁYou™re the 
Worshipful Master of a Masonic lodge, not 
the pope. Sealing packages with your ring?ﬂ 
 
Solomon glanced down at his gold ring and gave
 a chuckle. ﬁI didn™t 
seal this package, 
Robert. My great-grandfather did. Almost a century ago.ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s head snapped up. ﬁWhat?!ﬂ 
 
Solomon held up his ring finger. ﬁThis Mas
onic ring was his. Afte
r that, it was my 
grandfather™s, then my father™s . . . and eventually mine.ﬂ 
 
Langdon held up the package. ﬁYour great-grandfather wrapped this a 
century
 ago and 
nobody has opened it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s right.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut . . . why not?ﬂ 
 
Solomon smiled. ﬁBecause it™s not time.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared. ﬁTime for 
what
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁRobert, I know this will sound odd, but th
e less you know, the bett
er. Just put this 
package somewhere safe, and please
 tell no one I gave it to you.ﬂ 
 
Langdon searched his mentor™s eyes for a glin
t of playfulness. Solomon had a propensity 
for dramatics, and Langdon wondered if he wasn™t being played a bit here. ﬁPeter, are 
you sure this isn™t just a clev
er ploy to make me think I™ve 
been entrusted with some kind 
of ancient Masonic secret so I™ll 
be curious and decide to join?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Masons do not recruit, Robert, you know
 that. Besides, you™ve already told me 
you™d prefer not to join.ﬂ 
 
This was true. Langdon had great respect fo
r Masonic philosophy and symbolism, and 
yet he had decided never to be initiated; th
e order™s vows of secrecy would prevent him 
from discussing Freemasonry with his students.
 It had been for this same reason that 
Socrates had refused to formally participate in the Eleusinian Mysteries. 
 
As Langdon now regarded the mysterious little
 box and its Masonic seal, he could not 
help but ask the obvious que
stion. ﬁWhy not entrust this to one of your Masonic 
brothers?ﬂ 
 
ﬁLet™s just say I have an ins
tinct it would be safer stored 
outside
 the brotherhood. And 
please don™t let the size of this
 package fool you. If what my 
father told me is correct, 
then it contains something of substantial 
power.ﬂ He paused. ﬁA talisman, of sorts.ﬂ 
 
Did he say a talisman?
 By definition, a talisman was an object with magical powers. 
Traditionally, talismans were used for bringing 
luck, warding off evil sp
irits, or aiding in 
ancient rituals. ﬁPeter, you 
do
 realize that talismans went
 out of vogue in the Middle 
Ages, right?ﬂ 
 
Peter laid a patient hand on Langdon™s shoulde
r. ﬁI know how this sounds, Robert. I™ve 
known you a long time, and your skepticism is 
one of your greatest strengths as an 
academic. It is also your greatest weakness.
 I know you well enough to know you™re not a 
man I can ask to 
believe
 . . . only to 
trust
. So now I am asking you to trust me when I tell 
you this talisman is powerful. I was told it 
can imbue its possessor 
with the ability to 
bring order from chaos.ﬂ 
 
Langdon could only stare. The idea of ﬁorder fr
om chaosﬂ was one of the great Masonic 
axioms. 
Ordo ab chao.
 Even so, the claim that a talisman could impart 
any
 power at all 
was absurd, much less the power to bring order from chaos. 
 
ﬁThis talisman,ﬂ Solomon continued, ﬁwoul
d be dangerous in the wrong hands, and 
unfortunately, I have reason to believe power
ful people want to steal it from me.ﬂ His 
eyes were as serious as Langdon could ever r
ecall. ﬁI would like you to keep it safe for 
me for a while. Can you do that?ﬂ 
 
That night, Langdon sat alone at 
his kitchen table with the p
ackage and tried to imagine 
what could possibly be inside. 
In the end, he simply chalke
d it up to Peter™s
 eccentricity 
and locked the package in hi
s library™s wall safe, eventua
lly forgetting all about it. 
 
That was . . . until this morning. 
 
The phone call from the man with the southern accent.
 
 
ﬁOh, Professor, I almost forgot
!ﬂ the assistant had said af
ter giving Langdon the specifics 
of his travel arrangements to D.C. ﬁThere
 is one more thing Mr. Solomon requested.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes?ﬂ Langdon replied, his mind already moving 
to the lecture he ha
d just agreed to 
give. 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon left a note here for you.ﬂ The man began reading awkwardly, as if trying 
to decipher Peter™s penmanship. ﬁ‚Please ask R
obert . . . to bring . . . the small, sealed 
package I gave him many years ago.™ ﬂ The 
man paused. ﬁDoes this make any sense to 
you?ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt surprised as he recalled the small 
box that had been sitting in his wall safe 
all this time. ﬁActually, yes.
 I know what Peter means.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd you can bring it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course. Tell Peter I™ll bring it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWonderful.ﬂ The assistant sounded relieved. ﬁEnj
oy your speech tonight.
 Safe travels.ﬂ  
 
Before leaving home, Langdon had dutifully 
retrieved the wrapped package from the 
back of his safe and plac
ed it in his shoulder bag. 
 
Now he was standing in the U.S. Capitol, 
feeling certain of onl
y one thing. Peter 
Solomon would be horrified to know
 how badly Langdon had failed him. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 25 
 
 
 
My God,
 Katherine was right. As usual.
 
 
Trish Dunne stared in amazement at the sear
ch-spider results that 
were materializing on 
the plasma wall before her. She had doubted the search would turn up 
any
 results at all, 
but in fact, she now had over a dozen 
hits. And they were still coming in. 
 
One entry in particular looked quite promising. 
 
Trish turned and shouted in th
e direction of the library. ﬁKat
herine? I think you™ll want to 
see this!ﬂ 
 
It had been a couple of years 
since Trish had run a search sp
ider like this, and tonight™s 
results astounded her. 
A few years ago, this search would have been a dead end.
 Now, 
however, it seemed that the qua
ntity of searchable digital 
material in the world had 
exploded to the point where someone could fi
nd literally anything. Incredibly, one of the 
keywords was a word Trish had never even heard before . . . and the search even found 
that
. 
 
Katherine rushed through the cont
rol-room door. ﬁWhat have you got?ﬂ 
 
ﬁA 
bunch
 of candidates.ﬂ Trish motioned to th
e plasma wall. ﬁEvery one of these 
documents contains all of your key phrases verbatim.ﬂ 
 
Katherine tucked her hair behi
nd her ear and scanned the list. 
 
ﬁBefore you get too excited,ﬂ 
Trish added, ﬁI can assure you that most of these 
documents are 
not
 what you™re looking for. They™re wh
at we call black holes. Look at the 
file sizes. Absolutely enormous. They™re thi
ngs like compressed archives of millions of e-
mails, giant unabridged encyclopedia sets, globa
l message boards that have been running 
for years, and so forth. By virtue of their si
ze and diverse content, these files contain so 
many potential keywords that they suck in a
ny search engine that comes anywhere near 
them.ﬂ 
 
Katherine pointed to one of
 the entries near the top 
of the list. ﬁHow about 
that
 one?ﬂ 
 
Trish smiled. Katherine was a step ahead, havi
ng found the sole file 
on the list that had a 
small file size. ﬁGood eyes. Yeah, that™s re
ally our only candidate so far. In fact, 
that
 
file™s so small it can™t be 
more than a page or so.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOpen it.ﬂ Katherine™s tone was intense. 
 
Trish could not imagine a one-page document containing 
all
 the strange search strings 
Katherine had provided. Nonetheless, when
 she clicked and opened the document, the 
key phrases were there . . . crystal cl
ear and easy to spot in the text. 
 
Katherine strode over, eyes riveted to 
the plasma wall. ﬁThis document is . . . 
redacted
?ﬂ 
 
Trish nodded. ﬁWelcome to the world of digitized text.ﬂ 
 
Automatic redaction had become standard practice when offering digitized documents. 
Redaction was a process wherein a server allowed a user to search the entire text, but 
then revealed only a small por
tion of itŠa teaser of sorts
Šonly that text immediately 
flanking the requested keywords. By omitting th
e vast majority of the text, the server 
avoided copyright infringement and also
 sent the user an intriguing message: 
I have the 
information you™re searching for, but if you want
 the rest of it, you™ll
 have to buy it from 
me.
 
 
ﬁAs you can see,ﬂ Trish said, 
scrolling through the heavily abridged page, ﬁthe document 
contains all of your key phrases.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stared up at the redaction in silence. 
 
Trish gave her a minute and then scrolled back to the top of the page. Each of Katherine™s 
key phrases was underlined in capital letters 
and accompanied by a small sample of teaser 
textŠthe two words that appeared on 
either side of the requested phrase. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trish could not imagine what th
is document was referring to. 
And what the heck is a 
ﬁsymbolonﬂ?
 
 
Katherine stepped eagerly toward the scr
een. ﬁWhere did this document come from? 
Who wrote it?ﬂ 
 
Trish was already working on it. ﬁGive me
 a second. I™m trying to chase down the 
source.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI need to know who wrote this
,ﬂ Katherine repeated, her voice intense. ﬁI need to see the 
rest
 of it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m trying,ﬂ Trish said, startled 
by the edge in Katherine™s tone. 
 
Strangely, the file™s location wa
s not displaying as a traditiona
l Web address but rather as 
a numeric Internet Protocol address. ﬁI can
™t unmask the IP,ﬂ Trish said. ﬁThe domain 
name™s not coming up. Hold on.ﬂ She pulled up her terminal window. ﬁI™ll run a 
traceroute.ﬂ 
 
Trish typed the sequence of commands to pi
ng all the ﬁhopsﬂ between
 her control room™s 
machine and whatever machine was storing this document. 
 
ﬁTracing now,ﬂ she said, executing the command. 
 
Traceroutes were extremely fast
, and a long list of network devices appeared almost 
instantly on the plasma wall. Trish scanne
d down . . . down . . . through the path of 
routers and switches that connected her machine to . . . 
 
What the hell?
 Her trace had stopped before reachi
ng the document™s server. Her ping, 
for some reason, had hit a network device that 
swallowed it rather than bouncing it back. 
ﬁIt looks like my traceroute
 got blocked,ﬂ Trish said. 
Is that even possible?
 
 
ﬁRun it again.ﬂ 
 
Trish launched another traceroute and got the sa
me result. ﬁNope. Dead end. It™s like this 
document is on a server that is untraceable.ﬂ
 She looked at the last few hops before the 
dead end. ﬁI 
can
 tell you, though, it™s located 
somewhere in the D.C. area.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re kidding.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot surprising,ﬂ Trish said. ﬁThese spider
 programs spiral out geographically, meaning 
the first results are always local. Besides,
 one of your search strings was ‚Washington, 
D.C.™ ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow about a ‚who is™ search?ﬂ Katherine prompted. ﬁWoul
dn™t that tell you who owns 
the domain?ﬂ 
 
A bit lowbrow, but not a bad idea.
 Trish navigated to the ﬁwho isﬂ database and ran a 
search for the IP, hoping to ma
tch the cryptic numbers to an actual domain name. Her 
frustration was now tempered by rising curiosity. 
Who has this document?
 The ﬁwho isﬂ 
results appeared quickly, showing no match, an
d Trish held up her hands in defeat. ﬁIt™s 
like this IP address doesn™t 
exist. I can™t get any info
rmation about it at all.ﬂ 
 
ﬁObviously the IP 
exists
. We™ve just searched a document that™s stored there!ﬂ 
 
True.
 And yet whoever had this document appare
ntly preferred not to share his or her 
identity. ﬁI™m not sure what to tell you. System
s traces aren™t really
 my thing, and unless 
you want to call in someone with 
hacking skills, I™m at a loss.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo you know someone?ﬂ 
 
Trish turned and stared at her boss. ﬁKathe
rine, I was kidding. It™s not exactly a great 
idea.ﬂ  
 
ﬁBut it 
is
 done?ﬂ She checked her watch.  
 
ﬁUm, yeah . . . all the time. T
echnically it™s pretty easy.ﬂ  
 
ﬁWho do you know?ﬂ  
 
ﬁHackers?ﬂ Trish laughed nervously. ﬁLik
e half the guys at my old job.ﬂ  
 
ﬁAnyone you trust?ﬂ  
 
Is she serious?
 Trish could see Katherine was dead
 serious. ﬁWell, yeah,ﬂ she said 
hurriedly. ﬁI know this one guy we could call.
 He was our systems security specialistŠ
serious computer geek. He wanted to date me, which kind of sucked, but he™s a good guy, 
and I™d trust him. Also, he does freelance.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCan he be discreet?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe™s a hacker. Of course he can be discreet
. That™s what he does. But I™m sure he™d 
want at least a thousand bucks to even lookŠﬂ 
 
ﬁCall him. Offer him double for fast results.ﬂ 
 
Trish was not sure what made her more unc
omfortableŠhelping Kath
erine Solomon hire 
a hacker . . . or calling a guy who probabl
y still found it impossible to believe a pudgy, 
redheaded metasystems analyst would rebuff hi
s romantic advances. ﬁYou™re sure about 
this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁUse the phone in the librar
y,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁIt™s got a blocked number. And obviously 
don™t use my name.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRight.ﬂ Trish headed for the door but paus
ed when she heard Katherine™s iPhone chirp. 
With luck, the incoming text message might be information that would grant Trish a 
reprieve from this distasteful task. She waite
d as Katherine fished the iPhone from her lab 
coat™s pocket and eyed the screen. 
 
Katherine Solomon felt a wave of re
lief to see the name on her iPhone. 
 
At last.
 
 
PETER SOLOMON 
 
ﬁIt™s a text message from my brother,
ﬂ she said, glancing over at Trish.  
 
Trish looked hopeful. ﬁSo maybe we should ask 
him about all this . . . before we call a 
hacker?ﬂ 
 
Katherine eyed the redacted document on the plasma wall and heard Dr. Abaddon™s 
voice. 
That which your brother believes is 
hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found.
 Katherine 
had no idea what to believe anymore, and th
is document represented information about 
the far-fetched ideas with which Pete
r had apparently become obsessed. 
 
Katherine shook her head. ﬁI wa
nt to know who wrote this a
nd where it™s located. Make 
the call.ﬂ 
 
Trish frowned and headed for the door. 
 
Whether or not this document 
would be able to explain the 
mystery of what her brother 
had told Dr. Abaddon, there was at least 
one
 mystery that had been solved today. Her 
brother had finally learned how to use the 
text-messaging feature on the iPhone Katherine 
had given him. 
 
ﬁAnd alert the media,ﬂ Katherin
e called after Trish. ﬁThe grea
t Peter Solomon just sent 
his first text message.ﬂ 
 
 
In a strip-mall parking lot acr
oss the street from the SMSC
, Mal™akh stood beside his 
limo, stretching his legs and waiting for th
e phone call he knew would be coming. The 
rain had stopped, and a winter moon had star
ted to break through th
e clouds. It was the 
same moon that had shone down on Mal™akh 
through the oculus of
 the House of the 
Temple three months ago during his initiation. 
 
The world looks different tonight.
 
 
As he waited, his stomach growled again. Hi
s two-day fast, although 
uncomfortable, was 
critical to his preparation. Such were th
e ancient ways. Soon all physical discomforts 
would be inconsequential. 
 
As Mal™akh stood in the cold night 
air, he chuckled to see that 
fate
 had deposited him, 
rather ironically, directly in front of a tiny 
church. Here, nestled between Sterling Dental 
and a minimart, was a tiny sanctuary. 
 
LORD™S HOUSE OF GLORY.
 
 
Mal™akh gazed at the window, which displayed 
part of the church™s doctrinal statement: 
WE BELIEVE THAT JESUS CHRI
ST WAS BEGOTTEN BY THE HOLY 
SPIRIT, AND BORN OF THE VIRGIN 
MARY, AND IS BO
TH TRUE MAN AND 
GOD.
 
 
Mal™akh smiled. 
Yes, Jesus is indeed bothŠman
 and 
GodŠbut a virgin birth is not the 
prerequisite for divinity. 
That is not how it happens.
 
 
The ring of a cell phone cut the night air, qu
ickening his pulse. The phone that was now 
ringing was Mal™akh™s 
own
Ša cheap disposable phone he had purchased yesterday. The 
caller ID indicated it was the call he had been anticipating. 
 
A local call,
 Mal™akh mused, gazing out across Silver
 Hill Road toward the faint moonlit 
outline of a zigzag roofline over the 
treetops. Mal™akh flipped open his phone. 
 
ﬁThis is Dr. Abaddon,ﬂ he sai
d, tuning his voice deeper. 
 
ﬁIt™s Katherine,ﬂ the woman™s voice said. 
ﬁI finally heard from my brother.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh, I™m relieved. How is he?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe™s on his way to my lab right now,ﬂ Kath
erine said. ﬁIn fact, he suggested you join 
us.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ Mal™akh feigned 
hesitation. ﬁIn your . . . lab?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe must trust you deeply. He never invites 
anyone
 back there.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI suppose maybe he thinks a visit might help
 our discussions, but
 I feel like it™s an 
intrusion.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIf my 
brother
 says you™re welcome, then you™re welc
ome. Besides, he said he has a lot 
to tell us both, and I™d love to ge
t to the bottom of what™s going on.ﬂ 
 
ﬁVery well, then. 
Where
 exactly is your lab?ﬂ  
 
ﬁAt the Smithsonian Museum Support Center. Do you know where that is?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Mal™akh said, staring acro
ss the parking lot at the comp
lex. ﬁI™m actually in my car 
right now, and I have a guidance 
system. What™s the address?ﬂ 
 
ﬁForty-two-ten Silver Hill Road.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay, hold on. I™ll type it in.ﬂ Mal™akh waite
d for ten seconds and then said, ﬁAh, good 
news, it looks like I™m closer than I thought
. The GPS says I™m only about ten minutes 
away.ﬂ 
 
ﬁGreat. I™ll phone the secu
rity gate and tell them you™re coming through.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll see you shortly.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh pocketed the disposable pho
ne and looked out toward the SMSC. 
Was I rude to 
invite myself?
 Smiling, he now pulled out Peter Solo
mon™s iPhone and admired the text 
message he had sent Katherine several minutes earlier. 
 
Got your messages. All™s fine. Busy day. Fo
rgot appointment with Dr. Abaddon. Sorry 
not to mention him sooner. Long story. Am head
ed to lab now. If available, have Dr. 
Abaddon join us inside. I trust him fully, a
nd I have much to tell you both. ŠPeter  
 
Not surprisingly, Peter™s iPhone now pinged with an incoming reply from Katherine. 
 
peter, congrats on learning to text! relieve
d you™re okay. spoke to dr. A., and he is 
coming to lab. see you shortly! Šk  
 
Clutching Solomon™s iPhone, Mal™akh crouched down under his limousine and wedged 
the phone between the front tire and the pave
ment. This phone had served Mal™akh well . 
. . but now it was time it became untraceable. He climbed behind the wheel, put the car in 
gear, and crept forward until he heard th
e sharp crack of the iPhone imploding. 
 
Mal™akh put the car back in pa
rk and stared out at the di
stant silhouette of the SMSC. 
Ten 
minutes.
 Peter Solomon™s sprawling warehouse housed over thirty million treasures, but 
Mal™akh had come here tonight to obliterate only the two most valuable. 
 
All of Katherine Solomon™s research. 
 
And Katherine Solomon herself. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 26 
 
 
 
Professor Langdon?ﬂ
 Sato said. ﬁYou look like you™ve
 seen a ghost. Are you okay?ﬂ 
 
Langdon hoisted his daybag higher onto his should
er and laid his hand 
on top of it, as if 
somehow this might better hide the cube-sha
ped package he was ca
rrying. He could feel 
his face had gone ashen. ﬁI™m . . 
. just worried about Peter.ﬂ 
 
Sato cocked her head, eyeing him askew. 
 
Langdon felt a sudden wariness that Sato™s involv
ement tonight might relate to this small 
package that Solomon had entrusted to him. Peter had warned Langdon: 
Powerful people 
want to steal this
. 
It would be dangerous in the wrong hands.
 Langdon couldn™t imagine 
why the CIA would want a little box containing 
a talisman . . . or even what the talisman 
could be. 
Ordo ab chao?
 
 
Sato stepped closer, her 
black eyes probing. ﬁI sens
e you™ve had a revelation?ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt himself sweating now. ﬁNo, not exactly.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat™s on your mind?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI just . . .ﬂ Langdon hesitated, having no id
ea what to say. He had no intention of 
revealing the existence of
 the package in his bag, and yet if Sato took him to the CIA, his 
bag most certainly would be searched on the 
way in. ﬁActually . . .ﬂ he fibbed, ﬁI have 
another idea about the numbers on Peter™s hand.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s expression revealed nothing. ﬁYes?ﬂ Sh
e glanced over at Anderson now, who was 
just arriving from greeting the forens
ics team that had finally arrived. 
 
Langdon swallowed hard and crouched down besi
de the hand, wondering what he could 
possibly come up with to tell them. 
You™re a teacher, RobertŠimprovise!
 He took one 
last look at the seven ti
ny symbols, hoping for some sort of inspiration. 
 
 
 
 
 
Nothing. Blank.
 
 
As Langdon™s eidetic memory skimmed through hi
s mental encyclopedia of symbols, he 
could find only one possible point to make. 
It was something that had occurred to him 
initially, but had seemed unlikely. At the moment, however, he had to buy time to think. 
 
ﬁWell,ﬂ he began, ﬁa symbologist™s first 
clue that he™s on the wrong track when 
deciphering symbols and codes is when he starts interpreting symbols using multiple 
symbolic languages. For example, when I told you this text was Roman and Arabic, that 
was a poor analysis because I used multiple symbolic systems. The same is true for 
Roman and runic.ﬂ 
 
Sato crossed her arms and arched her eyebrows as if to say, ﬁGo on.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIn general, communications are made in 
one
 language, not multiple languages, and so a 
symbologist™s first job with
 any text is to find a 
single
 consistent symbolic system that 
applies to the entire text.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd you see a single system now?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, yes . . . and no.ﬂ Langdon™s experi
ence with the rotational symmetry of 
ambigrams had taught him that symbols some
times had meanings from multiple angles. 
In this case, he realized there was indeed 
a way to view all seven symbols in a single 
language. ﬁIf we manipulated the hand slight
ly, the language will become consistent.ﬂ 
Eerily, the manipulation Langdon was about to 
perform was one that seemed to have 
been suggested by Peter™s captor already when
 he spoke the ancient Hermetic adage. 
As 
above, so below.
 
 
Langdon felt a chill as he reached out and grasped the wooden base on which Peter™s 
hand was secured. Gently, he turned the ba
se upside down so that Peter™s extended 
fingers were now pointing stra
ight down. The symbols on the 
palm instantly transformed 
themselves. 
 
 
 
ﬁFrom this angle,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁX-I-I-I becomes a 
valid
 Roman numeralŠthirteen. 
Moreover, the rest of the characters can be
 interpreted using the Roman alphabetŠSBB.ﬂ 
Langdon assumed the analysis would elicit 
blank shrugs, but Anderson™s expression 
immediately changed. 
 
ﬁSBB?ﬂ the chief demanded. 
 
Sato turned to Anderson. ﬁIf I™m not mistaken, that sounds like a familiar numbering 
system here in the Capitol Building.ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked pale. ﬁIt is.ﬂ 
 
Sato gave a grim smile and nodded to Ande
rson. ﬁChief, follow me, please. I™d like a 
word in private.ﬂ 
 
As Director Sato led Chief Anders
on out of earshot, Langdon stood alone in 
bewilderment. 
What the hell is going on here? And what is SBB XIII?
 
 
Chief Anderson wondered how this night
 could possibly get any stranger. 
The hand says 
SBB13?
 He was amazed any outsider had even hear
d of SBB . . . much less SBB13. Peter 
Solomon™s index finger, it seemed, was not dire
cting them upward as it had appeared . . . 
but rather was pointing in 
quite the opposite direction. 
 
Director Sato led Anderson over to a quiet
 area near the bronze statue of Thomas 
Jefferson. ﬁChief,ﬂ she said, ﬁI trust you know 
exactly where SBB Thirteen is located?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo you know what™s inside?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, not without looking. I don™t thin
k it™s been used in decades.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, you™re going to open it up.ﬂ 
 
Anderson did not appreciate being told what
 he would do in his own building. ﬁMa™am, 
that may be problematic. I™ll have to check
 the assignment roster first. As you know, 
most of the lower levels are private offices 
or storage, and security protocol regarding 
privateŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYou will unlock SBB Thirteen for me,ﬂ Sato 
said, ﬁor I will call OS and send in a team 
with a battering ram.ﬂ 
 
Anderson stared at her a long moment and then
 pulled out his radio, ra
ising it to his lips. 
ﬁThis is Anderson. I need someone to unlock 
the SBB. Have someone meet me there in 
five minutes.ﬂ 
 
The voice that replied so
unded confused. ﬁChief, confirming you said SBB?ﬂ 
 
ﬁCorrect. SBB. Send someone immediately. And 
I™ll need a flashlight.ﬂ He stowed his 
radio. Anderson™s heart was pounding as Sato 
stepped closer, lowering her voice even 
further. 
 
ﬁChief, time is short,ﬂ she whis
pered, ﬁand I want you to get us down to SBB Thirteen as 
quickly as possible.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI also need something else from you.ﬂ 
 
In addition to breaking and entering?
 Anderson was in no position to protest, and yet it 
had not gone unnoticed by him that Sato had 
arrived within minutes of Peter™s hand 
appearing in the Rotunda, and that she now was using the situation to demand access to 
private sections of the U.S. Capitol. She seem
ed so far ahead of the 
curve tonight that she 
was practically defining it.  
 
Sato motioned across the room toward th
e professor. ﬁThe duffel bag on Langdon™s 
shoulder.ﬂ 
 
Anderson glanced over. ﬁWhat about it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI assume your staff X-rayed that bag when Langdon entered the building?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course. All bags are scanned.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI want to see that X-ray. I want to know what™s in his bag.ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked over at the bag Langdon had 
been carrying all evening. ﬁBut . . . 
wouldn™t it be easier just to ask him?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat part of my request was unclear?ﬂ 
 
Anderson pulled out his radio ag
ain and called in her reques
t. Sato gave Anderson her 
BlackBerry address and requested that his team
 e-mail her a digital copy of the X-ray as 
soon as they had located it. 
Reluctantly Anderson complied. 
 
Forensics was now collecting the severed hand for the Capitol Police, but Sato ordered 
them to deliver it directly to her team at 
Langley. Anderson was too tired to protest. He 
had just been run over by a tiny Japanese steamroller. 
 
ﬁAnd I want that ring,ﬂ Sato called over to Forensics. 
 
The chief technician seemed ready to questi
on her but thought better
 of it. He removed 
the gold ring from Peter™s ha
nd, placed it in a clear specim
en bag, and gave it to Sato. 
She slipped it into her jacket poc
ket, and then turned to Langdon. 
 
ﬁWe™re leaving, Professor. Bring your things.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere are we going?ﬂ Langdon replied. 
 
ﬁJust follow Mr. Anderson.ﬂ 
 
Yes,
 Anderson thought, 
and follow me closely.
 The SBB was a section of the Capitol that 
few ever visited. To reach it, they woul
d pass through a sprawling labyrinth of tiny 
chambers and tight passages buried beneat
h the crypt. Abraham Lincoln™s youngest son, 
Tad, had once gotten lost down there and al
most perished. Anderson was starting to 
suspect that if Sato had her way, Robe
rt Langdon might suffer a similar fate. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 27 
 
 
 
Systems security
 specialist Mark Zoubianis
 had always prided hims
elf on his ability to 
multitask. At the moment, he was seated on his futon along with a TV remote, a cordless 
phone, a laptop, a PDA, and a large bowl of Pi
rate™s Booty. With one eye on the muted 
Redskins game and one eye on his laptop, 
Zoubianis was speaking on his Bluetooth 
headset with a woman he had not heard from in over a year. 
 
Leave it to Trish Dunne to call on the night of a play-off game.
 
 
Confirming her social ineptitude
 yet again, his former colleag
ue had chosen the Redskins 
game as a perfect moment to chat him up and request a favor. After some brief small talk 
about the old days and how she missed his grea
t jokes, Trish had go
tten to her point: she 
was trying to unmask a hidden IP address, prob
ably that of a secure server in the D.C. 
area. The server contained a small text document,
 and she wanted access to it . . . or at the 
very least, some information about whose document it was. 
 
Right guy, wrong timing,
 he had told her. Trish then s
howered him with 
her finest geek 
flattery, most of which was true, and before
 Zoubianis knew it, he was typing a strange-
looking IP address into his laptop. 
 
Zoubianis took one look at the number and imme
diately felt uneasy. ﬁTrish, this IP has a 
funky format. It™s written in a protocol that is
n™t even publicly availabl
e yet. It™s probably 
gov intel or military.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMilitary?ﬂ Trish laughed. 
ﬁBelieve me, I just pulled a reda
cted document off this server, 
and it was 
not
 military.ﬂ Zoubianis pulled up his term
inal window and tried a traceroute. 
ﬁYou said your tr
aceroute died?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYeah. Twice. Same hop.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMine, too.ﬂ He pulled up a diagnostic probe 
and launched it. ﬁAnd wh
at™s so interesting 
about this IP?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI ran a delegator that tapped a 
search engine at this IP and pulled a redacted document. I 
need to see the rest of the document. I™m ha
ppy to pay them for it, but I can™t figure out 
who owns the IP or how to access it.ﬂ 
 
Zoubianis frowned at his screen. ﬁAre you sure about this? I™m running a diagnostic, and 
this firewall coding looks . . . pretty serious.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s why you get the big bucks.ﬂ 
 
Zoubianis considered it. They™d offered him 
a fortune for a job this easy. ﬁOne question, 
Trish. Why are you so hot on this?ﬂ 
 
Trish paused. ﬁI™m doing a favor for a friend.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMust be a special friend.ﬂ 
 
ﬁShe is.ﬂ 
 
Zoubianis chuckled and held his tongue. 
I knew it.
 
 
ﬁLook,ﬂ Trish said, sounding impatient. ﬁAre you good enough to unmask this IP? Yes or 
no?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, I™m good enough. And yes, I know you™re playing me like a fiddle.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow long will it take you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot long,ﬂ he said, typing as 
he spoke. ﬁI should be able 
to get into a 
machine on their 
network within ten minutes or so. Once I™m 
in and know what I™m looking at, I™ll call 
you back.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI appreciate it. So, are you doing well?ﬂ 
 
Now she asks?
 ﬁTrish, for God™s sake, you called me 
on the night of a play-off game and 
now you want to chat? Do you want me to hack this IP or not?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThanks, Mark. I appreciate it.
 I™ll be waiting for your call.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFifteen minutes.ﬂ Zoubianis hung up, grabbed 
his bowl of Pirate™s Booty, and unmuted 
the game. 
 
Women.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 28 
 
 
 
Where are
 they taking me?
 
 
As Langdon hurried with Anderson and Sato into
 the depths of the Capitol, he felt his 
heart rate increasing with each downward ste
p. They had begun their journey through the 
west portico of the Rotunda, descending a 
marble staircase and then doubling back 
through a wide doorway into the famous chamber directly beneath the Rotunda floor. 
 
The Capitol Crypt.
 
 
The air was heavier here, and Langdon was al
ready feeling claustrophobic. The crypt™s 
low ceiling and soft uplighting accentuated th
e robust girth of the forty Doric columns 
required to support the vast st
one floor directly overhead. 
Relax, Robert.
 
 
ﬁThis way,ﬂ Anderson said, moving quickly as 
he angled to the left across the wide 
circular space. 
 
Thankfully, this particular cr
ypt contained no bodies. Instead 
it contained several statues, 
a model of the Capitol, and a low storage area for the wooden catafalque on which 
coffins were laid for state funerals. The en
tourage hurried through, w
ithout even a glance 
at the four-pointed marble compass in the center of the floor where the Eternal Flame had 
once burned. 
 
Anderson seemed to be in a hurry, and Sa
to once again had her head buried in her 
BlackBerry. Cellular service, Langdon had 
heard, was boosted and broadcast to all 
corners of the Capitol Buildi
ng to support the hundreds of
 government phone calls that 
took place here every day. 
 
After diagonally crossing the crypt, th
e group entered a dimly lit foyer and began 
winding through a convoluted series of hallway
s and dead ends. The warren of passages 
contained numbered doorways, each of which bore an identification number. Langdon 
read the doors as they
 snaked their way around. 
 
S154 . . . S153 . . . S152 . . .
 
 
He had no idea what lay behind these doors, but
 at least one thing now seemed clearŠthe 
meaning of the tattoo on Peter Solomon™s palm. 
 
SBB13 appeared to be a numbered doorway so
mewhere in the bowels of the U.S. Capitol 
Building. 
 
ﬁWhat are all these doorways?ﬂ Langdon asked, 
clutching his daybag tightly to his ribs 
and wondering what Solomon™s tiny package 
could possibly have to do with a door 
marked SBB13. 
 
ﬁOffices and storage,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁ
Private
 offices and storage,
ﬂ he added, glancing 
back at Sato. 
 
Sato did not even glance
 up from her BlackBerry. 
 
ﬁThey look tiny,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁGlorified closets, most of th
em, but they™re still so
me of the most sought-after real estate 
in D.C. This is the heart of the original Cap
itol, and the old Senate chamber is two stories 
above us.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd SBB Thirteen?ﬂ Langdon aske
d. ﬁWhose office is that?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNobody™s. The SBB is a private storage area, and I must say, I™m puzzled howŠﬂ  
 
ﬁChief Anderson,ﬂ Sato interrupted without
 looking up from her Bl
ackBerry. ﬁJust take 
us there, please.ﬂ 
 
Anderson clenched his jaw and guided them 
on in silence through what was now feeling 
like a hybrid self-storage facility and epic 
labyrinth. On almost ev
ery wall, directional 
signs pointed back and forth, apparently attemp
ting to locate specific office blocks in this 
network of hallways. 
 
S142 to S152 . . . 
 
ST1 to ST70 . . . 
 
H1 to H166 & HT1 to HT67 . . . 
 
Langdon doubted he could ever find 
his way out of here alone. 
This place is a maze.
 
From all he could gather, office 
numbers began with either an 
S
 or an 
H
 depending on 
whether they were on the Senate side of the 
building or the House si
de. Areas designated 
ST and HT were apparently on a leve
l that Anderson called Terrace Level. 
 
Still no signs for SBB.
 
 
Finally they arrived at a 
heavy steel security door w
ith a key-card entry box. 
SB Level
 
 
Langdon sensed they were getting closer. 
 
Anderson reached for his key card but hesi
tated, looking uncomfortable with Sato™s 
demands. 
 
ﬁChief,ﬂ Sato prompted. ﬁWe don™t have all night.ﬂ 
 
Anderson reluctantly inserted his key card. 
The steel door released. He pushed it open, 
and they stepped through into the foyer 
beyond. The heavy door clicked shut behind 
them. 
 
Langdon wasn™t sure what he had hoped to see in
 this foyer, but the sight in front of him 
was definitely not it. He wa
s staring at a descending stai
rway. ﬁDown again?ﬂ he said, 
stopping short. ﬁThere™s a level 
under
 the crypt?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁ
SB
 stands for ‚Senate Basement.™ ﬂ 
 
Langdon groaned. 
Terrific.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 29 
 
 
 
The headlights
 winding up the SMSC™s wooded access ro
ad were the first the guard had 
seen in the last hour. Dutifu
lly, he turned down the volume on his portable TV set and 
stashed his snacks beneath the counter. 
Lousy timing.
 The Redskins were completing 
their opening drive, and he didn™t want to miss it. 
 
As the car drew closer, the guard checked the name on the notepad in front of him. 
 
Dr. Christopher Abaddon.
 
 
Katherine Solomon had just called to alert Secu
rity of this guest™s imminent arrival. The 
guard had no idea who this doctor might be
, but he was appare
ntly very good at 
doctoring; he was arriving in a black stretch li
mousine. The long, sleek vehicle rolled to a 
stop beside the guardhouse, and the driv
er™s tinted window lowered silently. 
 
ﬁGood evening,ﬂ the chauffeur said, doffing his cap. He was a powerfully built man with 
a shaved head. He was listeni
ng to the football game on his ra
dio. ﬁI have Dr. Christopher 
Abaddon for Ms. Katherine Solomon?ﬂ 
 
The guard nodded. ﬁIdentification, please.ﬂ 
 
The chauffeur looked surprised. ﬁI™m sorry, didn™t Ms. Solomon call ahead?ﬂ 
 
The guard nodded, stealing a glan
ce at the television. ﬁI™m sti
ll required to scan and log 
visitor identification. Sorr
y, regulations. I™ll need to
 see the doctor™s ID.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot a problem.ﬂ The chauffeur turned backwa
rd in his seat and 
spoke in hushed tones 
through the privacy screen. As he did, the gua
rd stole another peek at the game. The 
Redskins were breaking from the huddle now
, and he hoped to get this limo through 
before the next play. 
 
The chauffeur turned forward again and held out 
the ID that he™d apparently just received 
through the privacy screen. 
 
The guard took the card and quickly scanned it 
into his system. The D.C. driver™s license 
showed one Christopher Abaddon from Kalo
rama Heights. The photo depicted a 
handsome blond gentleman wearing a blue blazer
, a necktie, and a satin pocket square. 
Who the hell wears a pocket square to the DMV?
 
 
A muffled cheer went up from the television set,
 and the guard wheeled just in time to see 
a Redskins player dancing in the end zone, 
his finger pointed skyw
ard. ﬁI missed it,ﬂ the 
guard grumbled, returning to the window. 
 
ﬁOkay,ﬂ he said, returning the license
 to the chauffeur. ﬁYou™re all set.ﬂ 
 
As the limo pulled through, the guard re
turned to his TV, hoping for a replay. 
 
As Mal™akh drove his limo up 
the winding access road, he couldn™t help but smile. Peter 
Solomon™s secret museum had been simple 
to breach. Sweeter still, tonight was the 
second time in twenty-four hour
s that Mal™akh had broken into
 one of Solomon™s private 
spaces. Last night, a similar visit had been made to Solomon™s home. 
 
Although Peter Solomon had a magnificent countr
y estate in Potomac, he spent much of 
his time in the city at his penthouse apartm
ent at the exclusive Dorchester Arms. His 
building, like most that catered to the supe
r-rich, was a veritable fortress. High walls. 
Guard gates. Guest lists. 
Secured underground parking. 
 
Mal™akh had driven this very limousine 
up to the building™s guardhouse, doffed his 
chauffeur™s cap from his shaved head, and 
proclaimed, ﬁI have Dr. Christopher Abaddon. 
He is an invited guest of Mr. Peter Solom
on.ﬂ Mal™akh spoke the words as if he were 
announcing the Duke of York. 
 
The guard checked a log and then Abaddon™s ID. ﬁYes, I see Mr. Solomon is expecting 
Dr. Abaddon.ﬂ He pressed a button and the 
gate opened. ﬁMr. Solomon is in the 
penthouse apartment. Have your guest use the 
last
 elevator on the ri
ght. It goes all the 
way up.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you.ﬂ Mal™akh tipped 
his hat and drove through. 
 
As he wound deep into the garage, he scanne
d for security cameras.
 Nothing. Apparently, 
those who lived here were neit
her the kind of people who broke 
into cars nor the kind of 
people who appreciated being watched. 
 
Mal™akh parked in a dark corner near the 
elevators, lowered the divider between the 
driver™s compartment and the passenger compartment, and slithered through the opening 
into the back of the limo. Once in back, he 
got rid of his chauffeur™s cap and donned his 
blond wig. Straightening his jacket
 and tie, he checked the mirror to make sure he had not 
smeared his makeup. Mal™akh was not about
 to take any chances. Not tonight. 
 
I have waited too long for this.
 
 
Seconds later, Mal™akh was stepping into th
e private elevator. The ride to the top was 
silent and smooth. When the door opened, he f
ound himself in an elegant, private foyer. 
His host was already waiting. 
 
ﬁDr. Abaddon, welcome.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh looked into the man™s 
famous gray eyes and felt hi
s heart begin to race. ﬁMr. 
Solomon, I appreciate your seeing me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPlease, call me Peter.ﬂ The two men shook 
hands. As Mal™akh gripped the older man™s 
palm, he saw the gold Masonic ring on Solomo
n™s hand . . . the same hand that had once 
aimed a gun at Mal™akh. A voice whispe
red from Mal™akh™s distant past. 
If you pull that 
trigger, I will haunt you forever.
 
 
ﬁPlease come in,ﬂ Solomon said, ushering Ma
l™akh into an elegant living room whose 
expansive windows offered an astonishi
ng view of the Washington skyline. 
 
ﬁDo I smell tea steeping?ﬂ Mal™akh asked as he entered. 
 
Solomon looked impressed. ﬁMy parents always
 greeted guests with 
tea. I™ve carried on 
that tradition.ﬂ He led Mal™akh into the li
ving room, where a tea service was waiting in 
front of the fire. ﬁCream and sugar?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBlack, thank you.ﬂ 
 
Again Solomon looked impressed. ﬁA purist.ﬂ 
He poured them both a cup of black tea. 
ﬁYou said you needed to discuss something wi
th me that was sensitive in nature and 
could be discussed only in private.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you. I appreciate your time.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou and I are Masonic brothers now. We
 have a bond. Tell me how I can help you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFirst, I would like to
 thank you for the honor of the thir
ty-third degree a few months 
ago. This is deeply meaningful to me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m glad, but please know that those decisions are not mine alone
. They are by vote of 
the Supreme Council.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ Mal™akh suspect
ed Peter Solomon had probably voted against him, but 
within the Masons, as with
 all things, money was power
. Mal™akh, after achieving the 
thirty-second degree in his own lodge, 
had waited only a month before making a 
multimillion-dollar donation to charity in the 
name of the Masonic Grand Lodge. The 
unsolicited act of selflessne
ss, as Mal™akh anticipated, was enough to earn him a quick 
invitation into the elite thirty-third degree. 
And yet I have learned no secrets
. 
 
Despite the age-old whispersŠﬁAll is reveal
ed at the thirty-thi
rd degreeﬂŠMal™akh had 
been told nothing new, nothing of relevance to
 his quest. But he had 
never expected to be 
told. The inner circle of Freemasonry containe
d smaller circles still . . . circles Mal™akh 
would not see for years, if ever. He didn™t 
care. His initiation ha
d served its purpose. 
Something unique had happened within that
 Temple Room, and it had given Mal™akh 
power over all of them. 
I no longer play by your rules.
 
 
ﬁYou do realize,ﬂ Mal™akh sai
d, sipping his tea, ﬁthat you 
and I met many years ago.ﬂ 
 
Solomon looked surprised. ﬁReally? I don™t recall.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt was quite a long time ago.ﬂ 
And Christopher Abaddon is not my real name.
 
 
ﬁI™m so sorry. My mind must be ge
tting old. Remind me how I know you?ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh smiled one last time at the man he hated more than any other man on earth. ﬁIt™s 
unfortunate that you don™t recall.ﬂ 
 
In one fluid motion, Mal™akh pulled a sma
ll device from his pocket and extended it 
outward, driving it hard into the man™s chest.
 There was a flash of blue light, the sharp 
sizzle of the stun-gun discharge, and a gasp 
of pain as one million volts of electricity 
coursed through Peter Solomon™s body. His eyes
 went wide, and he slumped motionless 
in his chair. Mal™akh stood 
up now, towering over the man, saliv
ating like a lion about to 
consume his injured prey. 
 
Solomon was gasping, straining to breathe. 
 
Mal™akh saw fear in his victim™s eyes a
nd wondered how many people had ever seen the 
great Peter Solomon cower. Mal™akh savored 
the scene for several 
long seconds. He took 
a sip of tea, waiting for the man to catch his breath. 
 
Solomon was twitching, attempting to sp
eak. ﬁWh-why?ﬂ he finally managed. 
 
ﬁWhy do you think?ﬂ Mal™akh demanded. 
 
Solomon looked truly bewilder
ed. ﬁYou want . . . money?ﬂ 
 
Money?
 Mal™akh laughed and took another sip of 
tea. ﬁI gave the Masons millions of 
dollars; I have no need of wealth.ﬂ 
I come for wisdom, and he offers me wealth.
 
 
ﬁThen what . . . do you want?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou possess a secret. You will share it with me tonight.ﬂ 
 
Solomon struggled to lift his chin so he c
ould look Mal™akh in the eye. ﬁI don™t . . . 
understand.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo more lies!ﬂ Mal™ak
h shouted, advancing to within in
ches of the paralyzed man. ﬁI 
know what is hidden here in Washington.ﬂ 
 
Solomon™s gray eyes were defiant. ﬁI 
have no idea what you™re talking about!ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh took another sip of tea and set th
e cup on a coaster. ﬁYou spoke those same 
words to me ten years ago, on the night of your mother™s death.ﬂ 
 
Solomon™s eyes shot wide open. ﬁYou . . . ?ﬂ 
 
ﬁShe didn™t have to die. If you ha
d given me what I demanded . . .ﬂ 
 
The older man™s face contorted in a mask of 
horrified recognition . . . and disbelief. 
 
ﬁI warned you,ﬂ Mal™akh said, ﬁif you pulle
d the trigger, I woul
d haunt you forever.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut you™reŠﬂ 
 
Mal™akh lunged, driving the Ta
ser hard into Solomon™s ch
est again. There was another 
flash of blue light, and Solomon went completely limp. 
 
Mal™akh put the Taser back in 
his pocket and calmly finished
 his tea. When he was done, 
he dabbed his lips with a monogrammed linen 
napkin and peered down at his victim. 
ﬁShall we go?ﬂ 
 
Solomon™s body was motionless, but 
his eyes were wide and engaged. 
 
Mal™akh got down close and whispered in 
the man™s ear. ﬁI™m taking you to a place 
where only truth remains.ﬂ 
 
Without another word, Mal™akh wadded up th
e monogrammed napkin and stuffed it into 
Solomon™s mouth. Then he hoisted the limp ma
n onto his broad shoulders and headed for 
the private elevator. On his 
way out, he picked up Solomon™s iPhone and keys from the 
hall table. 
 
Tonight you will tell me all your secrets,
 Mal™akh thought. 
Including why you left me for 
dead all those years ago.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 30 
 
 
 
SB level.
 
 
Senate basement.
 
 
Robert Langdon™s claustrophobia gr
ipped him more tightly with
 every hastening step of 
their descent. As they moved deeper into
 the building™s origin
al foundation, the air 
became heavy, and the ventilation seemed none
xistent. The walls down here were an 
uneven blend of stone and yellow brick. 
 
Director Sato typed on her BlackBerry as they
 walked. Langdon sensed a suspicion in her 
guarded manner, but the feeling was quickly 
becoming reciprocal. Sa
to still hadn™t told 
him how she knew Langdon was here tonight. 
An issue of national security?
 He had a 
hard time understanding any relation between
 ancient mysticism and national security. 
Then again, he had a hard time understanding 
much of anything about this situation. 
 
Peter Solomon entrusted me with a talisman 
. . . a deluded lunatic
 tricked me into 
bringing it to the Capitol and wants me to use 
it to unlock a mystical portal . . . possibly 
in a room called SBB13.
 
 
Not exactly a clear picture. 
 
As they pressed on, Langdon tried to shake fr
om his mind the horrible image of Peter™s 
tattooed hand, transformed into the Hand of 
the Mysteries. The gruesome picture was 
accompanied by Peter™s voice: 
The Ancient Mysteries, Robert, have spawned many myths 
. . . but that does not mean 
they themselves are fiction.
 
 
Despite a career studying my
stical symbols and history, 
Langdon had always struggled 
intellectually with the idea of the Ancien
t Mysteries and their potent promise of 
apotheosis. 
 
Admittedly, the historical record contained indisputable evidence that secret wisdom had 
been passed down through the ages, apparently
 having come out of the Mystery Schools 
in early Egypt. This knowledge moved underground, resurfacing in 
Renaissance Europe, 
where, according to most accounts, it was entrus
ted to an elite group of
 scientists within 
the walls of Europe™s premier scientific
 think tankŠthe Royal Society of LondonŠ
enigmatically nicknamed the Invisible College. 
 
This concealed ﬁcollegeﬂ quickly became a br
ain trust of the world™s most enlightened 
mindsŠthose of Isaac Newton, Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and even Benjamin 
Franklin. Today, the list of modern ﬁf
ellowsﬂ was no less impressiveŠEinstein, 
Hawking, Bohr, and Celsius. These great mi
nds had all made quantum leaps in human 
understanding, advances that, according to so
me, were the result of their exposure to 
ancient wisdom hidden with
in the Invisible College. 
Langdon doubted this was true, 
although certainly there had b
een an unusual amount of ﬁmystical workﬂ taking place 
within those walls. 
 
The discovery of Isaac Newton™s secret 
papers in 1936 had stunned the world by 
revealing Newton™s all-consuming passion for 
the study of ancient al
chemy and mystical 
wisdom. Newton™s private papers included a ha
ndwritten letter to Robert Boyle in which 
he exhorted Boyle to keep ﬁhigh silenceﬂ regarding the mystical knowledge they had 
learned. ﬁIt cannot be communi
cated,ﬂ Newton wrote, ﬁwitho
ut immense damage to the 
world.ﬂ 
 
The meaning of this strange warn
ing was still being debated today. 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ Sato said suddenly, glancing up from her BlackBerry, ﬁdespite your 
insistence that you have no idea why you™re he
re tonight, perhaps you 
could shed light on 
the meaning of Peter Solomon™s ring.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can try,ﬂ Langdon said, refocusing. 
 
She produced the specimen bag and handed it to Langdon. ﬁTell me about the symbols on 
his ring.ﬂ 
 
Langdon examined the familiar ring as they m
oved through the deserted passageway. Its 
face bore the image of a double-headed phoenix holding a banner proclaiming 
ORDO 
AB CHAO,
 and its chest was emblazoned with the number 33. ﬁThe double-headed 
phoenix with the number thirty-three is th
e emblem of the highest Masonic degree.ﬂ 
Technically, this prestigious de
gree existed solely within the 
Scottish Rite. Nonetheless, 
the rites and degrees of Masonry were a comp
lex hierarchy that Langdon had no desire to 
detail for Sato tonight. ﬁEssentially, the thirty-t
hird degree is an elite honor reserved for a 
small group of highly accomplished Masons. Al
l the other degrees can be attained by 
successful completion of the previous degree, 
but ascension to the th
irty-third degree is 
controlled. It™s by invitation only.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo you were aware that Peter Solomon was 
a member of this elite inner circle?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course. Membership is hardly a secret.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd he is their highest-ranking official?ﬂ 
 
ﬁCurrently, yes. Peter heads the Supreme 
Council Thirty-third De
gree, which is the 
governing body of the Scottish Rite in Am
erica.ﬂ Langdon always 
loved visiting their 
headquartersŠthe House of the TempleŠa 
classical masterpiece whose symbolic 
ornamentation rivaled that of
 Scotland™s Rosslyn Chapel. 
 
ﬁProfessor, did you notice the engraving on th
e ring™s band? It bear
s the words ‚All is 
revealed at the thirty-third degree.™ ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁIt™s a common theme in Masonic lore.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMeaning, I assume, that if a Mason is admitted 
to this highest thirty-third degree, then 
something special is 
revealed
 to him?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, that™s the lore, but pr
obably not the reality. There™s 
always been conspiratorial 
conjecture that a select few within this hi
ghest echelon of Masonry are made privy to 
some great mystical secret. The truth, I su
spect, is probably far less dramatic.ﬂ 
 
Peter Solomon often made playful allusions to
 the existence of a precious Masonic secret, 
but Langdon always assumed it was just a misc
hievous attempt to coax him into joining 
the brotherhood. Unfortunately, tonight™s events
 had been anything but playful, and there 
had been nothing mischievous about the seri
ousness with which Peter had urged Langdon 
to protect the sealed package in his daybag. 
 
Langdon glanced forlornly at the plastic bag 
containing Peter™s gold 
ring. ﬁDirector,ﬂ he 
asked, ﬁwould you mind if I held on to this?ﬂ 
 
She looked over. ﬁWhy?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s very valuable to Peter, and I™
d like to return it to him tonight.ﬂ 
 
She looked skeptical. ﬁLet™s hope you get that chance.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThanks.ﬂ Langdon pocketed the ring. 
 
ﬁAnother question,ﬂ Sato said as
 they hastened deeper into 
the labyrinth. ﬁMy staff said 
that while cross-checking the concepts of th
e ‚thirty-third degree™ and ‚portal™ with 
Masonry, they turned up literally
 hundreds of references to a ‚
pyramid
™?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s not surprising, either
,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁThe pyramid
 builders of Egypt are the 
forerunners of the modern stonemasons, and 
the pyramid, along with Egyptian themes, is 
very common in Masonic symbolism.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSymbolizing what?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe pyramid essentially represents enli
ghtenment. It™s an architectural symbol 
emblematic of ancient man™s ability to br
eak free from his earthly plane and ascend 
upward toward heaven, toward the golden s
un, and ultimately, toward the supreme source 
of illumination.ﬂ 
 
She waited a moment. ﬁNothing else?ﬂ 
 
Nothing else?!
 Langdon had just described one of 
history™s most elegant symbols. 
The 
structure through which man elevated himself into the realm of the gods.
 
 
ﬁAccording to my staff,ﬂ she said, ﬁit s
ounds like there is a much more relevant 
connection tonight. They tell me ther
e exists a popular legend about a 
specific
 pyramid 
here in WashingtonŠa pyramid that relates sp
ecifically to the Masons and the Ancient 
Mysteries?ﬂ 
 
Langdon now realized what she was referring to, 
and he tried to dispel the notion before 
they wasted any more time. ﬁI 
am
 familiar with the legend, Director, but it™s pure fantasy. 
The Masonic Pyramid is one of D.C.™s mo
st enduring myths, probably stemming from 
the pyramid on the Great Seal of the United States.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhy didn™t you mention it earlier?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shrugged. ﬁBecause it has no basis in 
fact. Like I said, it™s a myth. One of many 
associated with the Masons.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd yet 
this
 particular myth relates direc
tly to the Ancient Mysteries?ﬂ 
 
ﬁSure, as do plenty of others. The Anci
ent Mysteries are the 
foundation for countless 
legends that have survived in
 historyŠstories about powerfu
l wisdom protected by secret 
guardians like the Templars, the Rosicrucians, the Illuminati, the AlumbradosŠthe list 
goes on and on. They are 
all
 based on the Ancient Mysteries . . . and the Masonic 
Pyramid is just one example.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI see,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁAnd what 
does this legend actually say?ﬂ 
 
Langdon considered it for a few steps and th
en replied, ﬁWell, I™m no specialist in 
conspiracy theory, but I am educated in 
mythology, and most accounts go something like 
this: The Ancient MysteriesŠth
e lost wisdom of the agesŠhave long been considered 
mankind™s most sacred treasure, and like all 
great treasures, they have been carefully 
protected. The enlightened sages who understood
 the true power of this wisdom learned 
to fear its awesome potential. They knew that if this secret knowledge were to fall into 
uninitiated hands, the results could be devasta
ting; as we said earlier, powerful tools can 
be used either for good or for evil. So, in 
order to protect the Ancient Mysteries, and 
mankind in the process, the early practitioners
 formed secret fraternities. Inside these 
brotherhoods, they shared their wisdom 
only with the properly initiated, passing the 
wisdom from sage to sage. Many believe 
we can look back and see the historical 
remnants of those who mastered 
the Mysteries . . . in the stories of sorcerers, magicians, 
and healers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd the Masonic Pyramid?ﬂ Sato 
asked. ﬁHow does that fit in?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell,ﬂ Langdon said, striding faster now to k
eep pace, ﬁthis is where history and myth 
begin to merge. According to some accounts, 
by the sixteenth century in Europe, almost 
all of these secret fraternities had become
 extinct, most of them exterminated by a 
growing tide of religious persecution. The 
Freemasons, it is said, became the last 
surviving custodians of the Ancient Mysteries.
 Understandably, they feared that if their 
own brotherhood one day died off like its pred
ecessors, the Ancient 
Mysteries would be 
lost for all time.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd the 
pyramid
?ﬂ Sato again pressed. 
 
Langdon was getting to it. ﬁThe legend of the Ma
sonic Pyramid is quite simple. It states 
that the Masons, in order to fulfill their res
ponsibility of protecting this great wisdom for 
future generations, decided to hide it in a 
great fortress.ﬂ Langdon tried to gather his 
recollections of the story. ﬁA
gain, I stress this is all myth, but allegedly, the Masons 
transported their secret wisdom from 
the Old World to the New WorldŠhere, to 
AmericaŠa land they hoped would remain fr
ee from religious tyranny. And here they 
built an impenetrable fortressŠa hidden 
pyramid
Šdesigned to protect the Ancient 
Mysteries until the time that 
all
 of mankind was ready to handle the awesome power that 
this wisdom could communicate. According to
 the myth, the Masons crowned their great 
pyramid with a shining, solid-gold capstone as
 symbol of the preci
ous treasure withinŠ
the ancient wisdom capable of empoweri
ng mankind to his full human potential. 
Apotheosis.ﬂ 
 
ﬁQuite a story,ﬂ Sato said. 
 
ﬁYes. The Masons fall victim to
 all kinds of crazy legends.ﬂ 
 
ﬁObviously you don™t believe such a pyramid exists.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course not,ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁThere™s no 
evidence whatsoever to
 suggest that our 
Masonic forefathers built any kind of pyr
amid in America, much less in D.C
.
 It™s pretty 
difficult to hide a pyramid, especially one la
rge enough to hold all the 
lost wisdom of the 
ages.ﬂ 
 
The legend, as Langdon recalled, never explained exactly 
what
 was supposed to be inside 
the Masonic PyramidŠwhether it was ancient texts, occult writings, scientific 
revelations, or something far more mysteriousŠbut the legend 
did
 say that the precious 
information inside was ingeniously encode
d . . . and understandable only to the most 
enlightened souls. 
 
ﬁAnyway,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁthis story falls in
to a category we symbologists call an 
‚archetypal hybrid™Ša blend of 
other classic legends, borrowing so many elements from 
popular mythology that it c
ould only be a fictional 
construct
 . . . not historical fact.ﬂ 
 
When Langdon taught his students about archetypal
 hybrids, he used the example of fairy 
tales, which were recounted 
across generations and exaggera
ted over time, borrowing so 
heavily from one another that they evolved into homogenized morality tales with the 
same iconic elementsŠvirginal damsels, hands
ome princes, impenetrable fortresses, and 
powerful wizards. By way of fairy tales, this primeval battle of ﬁgood vs. evilﬂ is 
ingrained into us as children
 through our stories: Merlin vs
. Morgan le Fay, Saint George 
vs. the Dragon, David vs. Goliath, Snow White
 vs. the Witch, and even Luke Skywalker 
battling Darth Vader. 
 
Sato scratched her head as they turned 
a corner and followed Anderson down a short 
flight of stairs. ﬁTell me 
this. If I™m not mistaken, pyramids were once considered 
mystical 
portals
 through which the deceased pharaohs
 could ascend to the gods, were 
they not?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTrue.ﬂ 
 
Sato stopped short and caught Langdon™s arm,
 glaring up at him 
with an expression 
somewhere between surprise and disbelief. 
ﬁYou™re saying Peter Solomon™s captor told 
you to find a hidden 
portal,
 and it didn™t occur to you th
at he was talking about the 
Masonic Pyramid from this legend?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBy 
any
 name, the Masonic Pyramid is a fairy tale. It™s purely fantasy.ﬂ 
 
Sato stepped closer to 
him now, and Langdon could sme
ll her cigarette breath. ﬁI 
understand your position on that, Professor, but
 for the sake of my investigation, the 
parallel is hard to ignore. 
A portal leading to secret knowle
dge? To my ear, this sounds a 
lot like what Peter Solomon™s cap
tor claims you, alone, can unlock.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, I can hardly believeŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat 
you
 believe is not the point. No matter wh
at you believe, you must concede that 
this man might 
himself
 believe that the Masonic Pyramid is real.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe man™s a lunatic! He may well believe th
at SBB Thirteen is the entrance to a giant 
underground pyramid that contains all the lost wisdom of the ancients!ﬂ 
 
Sato stood perfectly still, her eyes seet
hing. ﬁThe crisis I am facing tonight is 
not
 a fairy 
tale, Professor. It is 
quite real, I assure you.ﬂ 
 
A cold silence hung between them. 
 
ﬁMa™am?ﬂ Anderson finally said, gesturing to 
another secure door ten feet away. ﬁWe™re 
almost there, if you™d like to continue.ﬂ 
Sato finally broke eye contact with Langdon, 
motioning for Anderson to move on. They fo
llowed the security chief through the secure 
doorway, which deposited them in a narrow pass
age. Langdon looked left and then right. 
 
You™ve got to be kidding.
 
 
He was standing in the longest
 hallway he had ever seen. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 31 
 
 
 
Trish Dunne
 felt the familiar surge of adrenaline as she exited the bright lights of the 
Cube and moved into the raw darkness of the 
void. The SMSC™s front gate had just called 
to say that Katherine™s guest, Dr. Abaddon, ha
d arrived and required 
an escort back to 
Pod 5. Trish had offered to bring him back, mo
stly out of curiosity. Katherine had said 
very little about the man who would be vi
siting them, and Trish was intrigued. The man 
was apparently someone Peter Solomon trus
ted deeply; the Solomons never invited 
anyone back to the Cube. This was a first. 
 
I hope he handles the crossing okay,
 Trish thought as she moved through the frigid 
darkness. The last thing she needed was Ka
therine™s VIP panicking when he realized 
what he had to do to get to the lab. 
The first time is always the worst.
 
 
Trish™s first time had been about a year 
ago. She had accepted Katherine™s job offer, 
signed a nondisclosure, and then come to th
e SMSC with Katherine to see the lab. The 
two women had walked the length of ﬁThe 
Street,ﬂ arriving at a metal door marked 
POD 
5.
 Even though Katherine had tried to prepar
e her by describing the lab™s remote location, 
Trish was not ready for what she saw when the pod door hissed open. 
 
The void.
 
 
Katherine stepped over the threshold, walked 
a few feet into the perfect blackness, and 
then motioned for Trish to follow. ﬁTrust me. You won™t get lost.ﬂ 
 
Trish pictured herself wanderi
ng in a pitch-black, stadium-si
ze room and broke a sweat at 
the mere thought.  
 
ﬁWe have a guidance system to keep you on tr
ack.ﬂ Katherine pointed to the floor. ﬁVery 
low-tech.ﬂ 
 
Trish squinted through the darkness at the r
ough cement floor. It took 
a moment to see it 
in the darkness, but there was a narrow carpet runner that had been la
id down in a straight 
line. The carpet ran like a roadwa
y, disappearing into the darkness. 
 
ﬁSee with your feet,ﬂ Katherine said, turni
ng and walking off. ﬁJust follow right behind 
me.ﬂ 
 
As Katherine disappeared into the blackne
ss, Trish swallowed her fear and followed. 
This 
is insane!
 She had taken only a few steps down the carpet when the Pod 5 door swung 
shut behind her, snuffing out th
e last faint hint of light. Pu
lse racing, Trish turned all of 
her attention to the feeling of the carpet bene
ath her feet. She had ventured only a handful 
of steps down the soft runner when she felt th
e side of her right foot hit hard cement. 
Startled, she instinctively corrected to the 
left, getting both feet back on soft carpet. 
 
Katherine™s voice materialized up ahead in 
the blackness, her words almost entirely 
swallowed by the lifeless acoustics of this
 abyss. ﬁThe human body is amazing,ﬂ she said. 
ﬁIf you deprive it of one sensory input, the ot
her senses take over, almost instantly. Right 
now, the nerves in your feet are literally ‚tuni
ng™ themselves to become more sensitive.ﬂ 
 
Good thing,
 Trish thought, corr
ecting course again. 
 
They walked in silence for what seemed 
entirely too long. ﬁHow 
much farther?ﬂ Trish 
finally asked. 
 
ﬁWe™re about halfway.ﬂ Katherine™s voice sounded more distant now. 
 
Trish sped up, doing her best to stay compos
ed, but the breadth of the darkness felt like it 
would engulf her. 
I can™t see one millimeter in front of my face!
 ﬁKatherine? How do you 
know when to stop walking?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™ll know in a moment,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
That was a year ago, and now, tonight, Trish 
was once again in the 
void, heading in the 
opposite direction, out to the lobby to retrie
ve her boss™s guest. A sudden change in 
carpet texture beneath her feet alerted her 
that she was three yards from the exit. 
The 
warning track,
 as it was called by Peter Solomon, an avid baseball fan. Trish stopped 
short, pulled out her key card, and groped in
 the darkness along the wall until she found 
the raised slot and inserted her card. 
 
The door hissed open. 
 
Trish squinted into the welcom
ing light of the SMSC hallway. 
 
Made it . . . again.
 
 
Moving through the deserted co
rridors, Trish found herself 
thinking about the bizarre 
redacted file they had found on a secure network. 
Ancient portal? Secret location 
underground?
 She wondered if Mark Zoubianis wa
s having any luck figuring out where 
the mysterious document was located. 
 
Inside the control room, Kather
ine stood in the soft glow of
 the plasma wall and gazed up 
at the enigmatic document they had uncovere
d. She had isolated her key phrases now and 
felt increasingly certain that
 the document was talking a
bout the same far-flung legend 
that her brother had apparently shared with Dr. Abaddon. 
. . . secret location 
UNDERGROUND
 where the . . . 
 
. . . somewhere in 
WASHINGTON, D.C.
, the coordinates . . . 
 
. . . uncovered an 
ANCIENT PORTAL
 that led . . . 
 
. . . warning the 
PYRAMID
 holds dangerous . . . 
 
. . . decipher this 
ENGRAVED SYMBOLON
 to unveil . . . 
 
 
I need to see the rest of the file,
 Katherine thought. 
 
She stared a moment longer a
nd then flipped the plasma wa
ll™s power switch. Katherine 
always turned off this energy-intensive displa
y so as not to waste 
the fuel cell™s liquid 
hydrogen reserves. 
 
She watched as her keywords slowly faded, 
collapsing down into a tiny white dot, which 
hovered in the middle of the wall an
d then finally twinkled out. 
 
She turned and walked back toward he
r office. Dr. Abaddon would be arriving 
momentarily, and she wanted to make him feel welcome. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 32 
 
 
 
ﬁAlmost there,ﬂ
 Anderson said, guiding Langdon and Sa
to down the seemingly endless 
corridor that ran the 
entire length of the Capitol™s eas
tern foundation. ﬁIn Lincoln™s day, 
this passage had a dirt floor and was filled with rats.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt grateful the floor had been tiled;
 he was not a big fan of rats. The group 
continued on, their footfalls drumming up an
 eerie, uneven echo in the long passageway. 
Doorways lined the long hallway, some clos
ed but many ajar. Many of the rooms down 
on this level looked abandoned. Langdon noticed the numbers on the doors were now 
descending and, after a while, seemed to be running out. 
 
SB4 . . . SB3 . . . SB2 . . . SB1 . . . 
 
They continued past an unmarked door, but
 Anderson stopped short when the numbers 
began ascending again. 
 
HB1 . . . HB2 . . . 
 
ﬁSorry,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁMissed it. I al
most never come down this deep.ﬂ  
 
The group backed up a few yards to an old metal door, which Langdon now realized was 
located at the hallway™s central pointŠthe me
ridian that divided the Senate Basement 
(SB) and the House Basement (HB). As it turn
ed out, the door was indeed marked, but its 
engraving was so faded, it was almost imperceptible. 
SBB
 
 
ﬁHere we are,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁKeys will be arriving any moment.ﬂ 
 
Sato frowned and checked her watch. 
 
Langdon eyed the SBB marking and asked Anderson, ﬁWhy is this space associated with 
the 
Senate
 side even though it™s in the middle?ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked puzzled. ﬁWhat do you mean?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt says SBB, which begins with an 
S,
 not an 
H
.ﬂ 
 
Anderson shook his head. ﬁThe 
S
 in SBB doesn™t stand for Senate. ItŠﬂ 
 
ﬁChief?ﬂ a guard called out in
 the distance. He came jogging up the hallway toward them, 
holding out a key. ﬁSorry, sir, it took a fe
w minutes. We couldn™t locate the main SBB 
key. This is a spare from an auxiliary box.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe original is missing?ﬂ A
nderson said, sounding surprised. 
 
ﬁProbably lost,ﬂ the guard replied, arrivi
ng out of breath. ﬁNobody has requested access 
down here for ages.ﬂ 
 
Anderson took the key. ﬁNo secondary key for SBB Thirteen?ﬂ 
 
ﬁSorry, so far we™re not finding keys for 
any
 of the rooms in the SBB. MacDonald™s on it 
now.ﬂ The guard pulled out his radio and spoke
 into it. ﬁBob? I™m with the chief. Any 
additional info yet on the key for SBB Thirteen?ﬂ 
 
The guard™s radio crackled, and a voice replied, 
ﬁActually, yeah. It™s strange. I™m seeing 
no entries since we computerized, but the hard 
logs indicate all the storage rooms in the 
SBB were cleaned out and abandoned more than
 twenty years ago. They™re now listed as 
unused space.ﬂ He paused. ﬁAll 
except for SBB Thirteen.ﬂ 
 
Anderson grabbed the radio. ﬁThis is
 the chief. What do you mean, all 
except
 SBB 
Thirteen?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, sir,ﬂ the voice replied, ﬁI™ve got a ha
ndwritten notation here
 that designates SBB 
Thirteen as ‚private.™ It wa
s a long time ago, but it™s written 
and initialed by the Architect 
himself.ﬂ 
 
The term 
Architect
, Langdon knew, was not a reference 
to the man who had designed the 
Capitol, but rather to the man who 
ran
 it. Similar to a building manager, the man 
appointed as Architect of the 
Capitol was in charge of ever
ything including maintenance, 
restoration, security, hiring pe
rsonnel, and assigning offices. 
 
ﬁThe strange thing . . .ﬂ the voice on the 
radio said, ﬁis that th
e Architect™s notation 
indicates that this ‚private space™ was set aside for the use of Peter Solomon.ﬂ 
 
Langdon, Sato, and Anderson all exchanged startled looks.  
 
ﬁI™m guessing, sir,ﬂ the voice co
ntinued, ﬁthat Mr. Solomon ha
s our primary key to the 
SBB as well as any keys to SBB Thirteen.ﬂ 
 
Langdon could not believe his ears. 
Peter has a private room 
in the basement of the 
Capitol?
 He had always known Peter Solomon had 
secrets, but this was surprising even 
to Langdon. 
 
ﬁOkay,ﬂ Anderson said, clearl
y unamused. ﬁWe™re hoping to get access to SBB Thirteen 
specifically, so keep looki
ng for a secondary key.ﬂ  
 
ﬁWill do, sir. We™re also working on the 
digital image that you requestedŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you,ﬂ Anderson interrupted, pressing the 
talk button and cutting him off. ﬁThat 
will be all. Send that file to Director Sa
to™s BlackBerry as soon as you have it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁUnderstood, sir.ﬂ The 
radio went silent. 
 
Anderson handed the radio back to
 the guard in front of them. 
 
The guard pulled out a photocopy of a blueprint 
and handed it to his chief. ﬁSir, the SBB 
is in gray, and we™ve notated with an 
X
 which room is SBB Thir
teen, so it shouldn™t be 
hard to find. The area is quite small.ﬂ 
 
Anderson thanked the guard a
nd turned his focus to the 
blueprint as the young man 
hurried off. Langdon looked on, surprised to see 
the astonishing number
 of cubicles that 
made up the bizarre maze beneath the U.S. Capitol. 
 
Anderson studied the blueprint for a moment, 
nodded, and then stuffed it into his pocket. 
Turning to the door marked 
SBB
, he raised the key, but he
sitated, looking uneasy about 
opening it. Langdon felt similar misgivings; he
 had no idea what was behind this door, 
but he was quite certain that whatever Solom
on had hidden down here, he wanted to keep 
private. 
Very private.
 
 
Sato cleared her throat, and Anderson got 
the message. The chief took a deep breath, 
inserted the key, and tried to
 turn it. The key didn™t move. For a split second, Langdon 
felt hopeful the key was wrong. On the second 
try, though, the lock turned, and Anderson 
heaved the door open. 
 
As the heavy door creaked outward, damp air rushed out into the corridor. 
 
Langdon peered into the darkness bu
t could see nothing at all. 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ Anderson said, glancing back 
at Langdon as he groped blindly for a light 
switch. ﬁTo answer 
your question, the 
S
 in SBB doesn™t stand for Senate. It stands for 
sub.
ﬂ 
 
ﬁSub?ﬂ Langdon asked, puzzled. 
 
Anderson nodded and flicked the switch just in
side the door. A single bulb illuminated an 
alarmingly steep staircase descending in
to inky blackness. ﬁSBB is the Capitol™s 
subbasement.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 33 
 
 
 
Systems security
 specialist Mark Zoubianis was si
nking deeper into his futon and 
scowling at the information on his laptop screen. 
 
W
hat the hell kind of address
 is 
this?
 
 
His best hacking tools were 
entirely ineffective at breaki
ng into the document or at 
unmasking Trish™s mysterious IP address.
 Ten minutes had passed, and Zoubianis™s 
program was still pounding away in vain at 
the network firewalls. They showed little 
hope of penetration. 
No wonder they™re overpaying me.
 He was about to retool and try a 
different approach when his phone rang. 
 
Trish, for Christ™s sake, I said I™d call you.
 He muted the football game and answered. 
ﬁYeah?ﬂ  
 
ﬁIs this Mark Zoubianis?ﬂ a man asked. 
ﬁAt 357 Kingston Drive in Washington?ﬂ 
 
Zoubianis could hear other muffled conversations in the background. 
A telemarketer 
during the play-offs? Are they insane?
 ﬁLet me guess, I won a week in Anguilla?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ the voice replied with no 
trace of humor. ﬁThi
s is systems security for the Central 
Intelligence Agency. We would like to know wh
y you are attempting to hack one of our 
classified databases?ﬂ 
 
Three stories above the Capitol Building™s s
ubbasement, in the wide-open spaces of the 
visitor center, security guard 
Nuñez locked the main entry door
s as he did every night at 
this time. As he headed back across the expans
ive marble floors, he thought of the man in 
the army-surplus jack
et with the tattoos. 
 
I let him in.
 Nuñez wondered if he would have a job tomorrow. 
 
As he headed toward the escalator, a sudde
n pounding on the outside doors caused him to 
turn. He squinted back toward the main en
trance and saw an elderly African American 
man outside, rapping on the glass with his open palm and motioning to be let in. 
 
Nuñez shook his head and pointed to his watch. 
 
The man pounded again and stepped into the 
light. He was immaculately dressed in a 
blue suit and had close-cropped gray
ing hair. Nuñez™s pulse quickened. 
Holy shit.
 Even at 
a distance, Nuñez now recognized 
who this man was. He hurried back to the entrance and 
unlocked the door. ﬁI™m sorry, sir. Please, please come in.ﬂ 
 
Warren BellamyŠArchitect of the CapitolŠ
stepped across the threshold and thanked 
Nuñez with a polite nod. Bellamy was lithe a
nd slender, with an erect posture and 
piercing gaze that exuded the confidence of 
a man in full control of his surroundings. For 
the last twenty-five years, Bellamy had served as the supervisor of the U.S. Capitol. 
 
ﬁMay I help you, sir?ﬂ Nuñez asked. 
 
ﬁThank you, yes.ﬂ Bellamy enunciated his word
s with crisp precisi
on. As a northeastern 
Ivy League graduate, his dict
ion was so exacting he sounded 
almost British. ﬁI™ve just 
learned that you had an incident here th
is evening.ﬂ He looked deeply concerned. 
 
ﬁYes, sir. It wasŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere™s Chief Anderson?ﬂ 
 
ﬁDownstairs with Director Sato fr
om the CIA™s Office of Security.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy™s eyes widened with concern. ﬁThe CIA is here?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir. Director Sato arrived almo
st immediately after the incident.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhy?ﬂ Bellamy demanded. 
 
Nuñez shrugged. 
As if I was going to ask?
 
 
Bellamy strode directly toward 
the escalators. ﬁWhere are they?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThey just went to the lower leve
ls.ﬂ Nuñez hastened after him. 
 
Bellamy glanced back with a look of con
cern. ﬁDownstairs? Why?
ﬂ ﬁI don™t really 
knowŠI just heard it on my radio.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy was moving faster now. ﬁTake me to them right away.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir.ﬂ  
 
As the two men hurried across the open e
xpanse, Nuñez caught a glimpse of a large 
golden ring on Bellamy™s finger. 
 
Nuñez pulled out his radio. ﬁI™ll alert 
the chief that you™re coming down.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo.ﬂ Bellamy™s eyes flashed dangerous
ly. ﬁI™d prefer to be unannounced.ﬂ 
 
Nuñez had made some big mistakes tonight, 
but failing to alert Chief Anderson that the 
Architect was now in the buildi
ng would be his last. ﬁSir?ﬂ he
 said, uneasy. ﬁI think Chief 
Anderson would preferŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYou are aware that I 
employ
 Mr. Anderson?ﬂ Bellamy said. 
 
Nuñez nodded. 
 
ﬁThen I think he would pref
er you obey my wishes.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 34 
 
 
 
Trish Dunne
 entered the SMSC lobby and looked up with surprise. The guest waiting 
here looked nothing like th
e usual bookish, flannel-clad
 doctors who entered this 
buildingŠthose of anthropol
ogy, oceanography, geology, and ot
her scientific fields. 
Quite to the contrary, Dr. Abaddon looked almost
 aristocratic in hi
s impeccably tailored 
suit. He was tall, with a broad torso, well-
tanned face, and perfectly combed blond hair 
that gave Trish the impression he was more accustomed to luxuries than to laboratories. 
 
ﬁDr. Abaddon, I presume?ﬂ Trish said, extending her hand. 
 
The man looked uncertain, but he took Trish™s plump hand in his broad palm. ﬁI™m sorry. 
And 
you
 are?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTrish Dunne,ﬂ she replied. ﬁI™m Katherine™s 
assistant. She asked me to escort you back 
to her lab.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh, I see.ﬂ The man smiled now. ﬁVery nice 
to meet you, Trish. My apologies if I 
seemed confused. I was under the impression Ka
therine was here alone this evening.ﬂ He 
motioned down the hall. ﬁBut 
I™m all yours. Lead the way.ﬂ 
 
Despite the man™s quick recovery, Trish had se
en the flash of disappointment in his eyes. 
She now suspected the motive for Kather
ine™s secrecy earlier about Dr. Abaddon. 
A 
budding romance, maybe?
 Katherine never discussed her so
cial life, but her visitor was 
attractive and well-groomed, and although younger 
than Katherine, he clearly came from 
her world of wealth and privilege. Noneth
eless, whatever Dr. Abaddon had imagined 
tonight™s visit might entail, 
Trish™s presence did not seem to be part of his plan. 
 
At the lobby™s security chec
kpoint, a lone guard quickly pu
lled off his headphones, and 
Trish could hear the Redskins game bl
aring. The guard put Dr. Abaddon through the 
usual visitor routine of metal detectors and temporary security badges. 
 
ﬁWho™s winning?ﬂ Dr. Abaddon said affably as
 he emptied his pockets of a cell phone, 
some keys, and a cigarette lighter. 
 
ﬁSkins by three,ﬂ the guard 
said, sounding eager to get back. ﬁHelluva game.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon will be arriving shortly,ﬂ 
Trish told the guard. ﬁWould you please send 
him back to the lab once he arrives?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWill do.ﬂ The guard gave an appreciative wi
nk as they passed through. ﬁThanks for the 
heads-up. I™ll look busy.ﬂ 
 
Trish™s comment had been not only for the be
nefit of the guard but also to remind Dr. 
Abaddon that Trish was not the only one in
truding on his private evening here with 
Katherine. 
 
ﬁSo how do you know Katherine?ﬂ Trish aske
d, glancing up at the mysterious guest. 
 
Dr. Abaddon chuckled. ﬁOh, it™s a long st
ory. We™ve been working on something 
together.ﬂ 
 
Understood,
 Trish thought. 
None of my business.
 
 
ﬁThis is an amazing facility,ﬂ Abaddon sa
id, glancing around as they moved down the 
massive corridor. ﬁI™ve never actually been here.ﬂ 
 
His airy tone was becoming more genial wi
th every step, and Trish noticed he was 
actively taking it all in. In the 
bright lights of the hallway, sh
e also noticed that his face 
looked like he had a fake tan. 
Odd.
 Nonetheless, as they naviga
ted the deserted corridors, 
Trish gave him a general synopsis of th
e SMSC™s purpose and function, including the 
various pods and their contents. 
 
The visitor looked impressed. ﬁSounds like th
is place has a treasure 
trove of priceless 
artifacts. I would have expect
ed guards posted everywhere.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo need,ﬂ Trish said, motioning to the row of
 fish-eye lenses lining the ceiling high 
above. ﬁSecurity here is automated. Every inch
 of this corridor 
is recorded twenty-
four/seven, and this corridor is the spine of
 the facility. It™s im
possible to access any of 
the rooms off this corridor wit
hout a key card and PIN number.ﬂ 
 
ﬁEfficient use of cameras.ﬂ 
 
ﬁKnock on wood, we™ve never had a theft. Then 
again, this is not the kind of museum 
anyone would robŠthere™s not much call on the 
black market for extinct flowers, Inuit 
kayaks, or giant squid carcasses.ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon chuckled. ﬁI 
suppose you™re right.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOur biggest security threat is rodents a
nd insects.ﬂ Trish explained how the building 
prevented insect infestations by freezing all 
SMSC refuse and also by an architectural 
feature called a ﬁdead zoneﬂŠan inhospitabl
e compartment between double walls, which 
surrounded the entire building like a sheath. 
 
ﬁIncredible,ﬂ Abaddon said. ﬁSo, where is Katherine and Peter™s lab?ﬂ 
 
ﬁPod Five,ﬂ Trish said. ﬁIt™s all the 
way at the end of this hallway.ﬂ 
 
Abaddon halted suddenly, spinning to his righ
t, toward a small window. ﬁMy word! Will 
you look at 
that
!ﬂ 
 
Trish laughed. ﬁYeah, that™s Pod 
Three. They call it Wet Pod.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWet?ﬂ Abaddon said, face pressed to the glass. 
 
ﬁThere are over three thousand gallons of li
quid ethanol in there. Remember the giant 
squid carcass I mentioned earlier?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s the squid?!ﬂ Dr. Abaddon turned fr
om the window momentarily, his eyes wide. 
ﬁIt™s huge!ﬂ 
 
ﬁA female Architeuthis,ﬂ Trish 
said. ﬁShe™s over forty feet.ﬂ 
 
Dr. Abaddon, apparently enraptured by the sight 
of the squid, seemed unable to pull his 
eyes away from the glass. For a moment, the grown man reminded Trish of a little boy at 
a pet-store window, wishing he could go in 
and see a puppy. Five seconds later, he was 
still staring longingl
y through the window. 
 
ﬁOkay, okay,ﬂ Trish finally said, laughing as 
she inserted her key card and typed her PIN 
number. ﬁCome on. I™ll show you the squid.ﬂ 
 
As Mal™akh stepped into the dimly lit world 
of Pod 3, he scanned the walls for security 
cameras. Katherine™s pudgy little assistant bega
n rattling on about the specimens in this 
room. Mal™akh tuned her out. He had no intere
st whatsoever in gi
ant squids. His only 
interest was in using this dark, priv
ate space to solve an unexpected problem. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 35 
 
 
 
The wooden
 stairs descending to the Capitol™s subba
sement were as steep and shallow as 
any stairs Langdon had ever traversed
.
 His breathing was faster now, and his lungs felt 
tight. The air down here was cold and da
mp, and Langdon couldn™t help but flash on a 
similar set of stairs he had taken a few 
years back into the Vatican™s Necropolis. 
The City 
of the Dead.
 
 
Ahead of him, Anderson led the way with 
his flashlight. Behind Langdon, Sato followed 
closely, her tiny hands occasiona
lly pressing into Langdon™s back. 
I™m going as fast as I 
can.
 Langdon inhaled deeply, trying to ignore the 
cramped walls on either side of him. 
There was barely room for his shoulders on 
this staircase, and 
his daybag now scraped 
down the sidewall. 
 
ﬁMaybe you should leave your bag a
bove,ﬂ Sato offered behind him. 
 
ﬁI™m fine,ﬂ Langdon replied, having no intention 
of letting it out of hi
s sight. He pictured 
Peter™s little package and could not begin to
 imagine how it might re
late to anything in 
the subbasement of the U.S. Capitol. 
 
ﬁJust a few more steps,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁAlmost there.ﬂ 
 
The group had descended into darkness, movi
ng beyond the reach of the staircase™s lone 
lightbulb. When Langdon stepped off the final w
ooden tread, he could feel that the floor 
beneath his feet was dirt. 
Journey to the center of the Earth.
 Sato stepped down behind 
him. 
 
Anderson now raised his beam, examining th
eir surroundings. The subbasement was less 
of a basement than it was an ultranarrow co
rridor that ran perpendicular to the stairs. 
Anderson shone his light left and then ri
ght, and Langdon could see 
the passage was only 
about fifty feet long and lined on both side
s with small wooden doors. The doors abutted 
one another so closely that the rooms behind th
em could not have been
 more than ten feet 
wide. 
 
ACME Storage meets the Catacombs of Domatilla,
 Langdon thought as Anderson 
consulted the blueprint. The 
tiny section depicting the subbasement was marked with an 
X
 to show the location of SBB13. Langdon coul
dn™t help but notice that the layout was 
identical to a fourteen-tomb mausoleumŠse
ven vaults facing seven vaultsŠwith one 
removed to accommodate the stairs they had just descended. 
Thirteen in all.
 
 
 
 
He suspected America™s ﬁthirteenﬂ conspiracy 
theorists would have 
a field day if they 
knew there were exactly 
thirteen
 storage rooms buried beneath the U.S. Capitol. Some 
found it suspicious that the Grea
t Seal of the United States 
had thirteen stars, thirteen 
arrows, thirteen pyramid steps, thirteen shie
ld stripes, thirteen olive leaves, thirteen 
olives, thirteen letters in 
annuit coeptis,
 thirteen letters in 
e pluribus unum,
 and on and on. 
 
ﬁIt 
does
 look abandoned,ﬂ Anderson said, shining th
e beam into the chamber directly in 
front of them. The heavy wooden door was wi
de open. The shaft of light illuminated a 
narrow stone chamberŠabout ten feet wide by
 some thirty feet 
deepŠlike a dead-end 
hallway to nowhere. The chamber contained nothing more than a couple of old collapsed 
wooden boxes and some crumpled packing paper. 
 
Anderson shone his light on a copper plate m
ounted on the door. The plate was covered 
with verdigris, but the 
old marking was legible: 
SBB IV
 
 
ﬁSBB Four,ﬂ Anderson said. 
 
ﬁWhich one is SBB Thirteen?ﬂ Sato asked, fa
int wisps of steam curling out of her mouth 
in the cold subterranean air. 
 
Anderson turned the beam toward the s
outh end of the corr
idor. ﬁDown there.ﬂ 
 
Langdon peered down the narrow passage and shiv
ered, feeling a light sweat despite the 
cold. 
 
As they moved through the phalanx of doorways
, all of the rooms looked the same, doors 
ajar, apparently abandoned long ago. When th
ey reached the end of
 the line, Anderson 
turned to his right, raising the beam to p
eer into room SBB13. The flashlight beam, 
however, was impeded by a heavy wooden door. 
 
Unlike the others, the door to SBB13 was closed. 
 
This final door looked exac
tly like the othersŠheavy hinge
s, iron handle, and a copper 
number plate encrusted with green. The seve
n characters on the number plate were the 
same characters on Peter™s palm upstairs. 
SBB XIII
 
 
Please tell me the door is locked,
 Langdon thought. 
 
Sato spoke without hesi
tation. ﬁTry the door.ﬂ 
 
The police chief looked uneasy, but he reached 
out, grasped the heavy iron handle, and 
pushed down on it. The handle didn™t budge. 
He shone the light now, illuminating a 
heavy, old-fashioned lock plate and keyhole. 
 
ﬁTry the master key,ﬂ Sato said. 
 
Anderson produced the main key from the entr
y door upstairs, but it was not even close 
to fitting. 
 
ﬁAm I mistaken,ﬂ Sato said, her tone sarcas
tic, ﬁor shouldn™t Secu
rity have access to 
every corner of a building in case of emergency?ﬂ 
 
Anderson exhaled and looked back at Sat
o. ﬁMa™am, my men are checking for a 
secondary key, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁShoot the lock,ﬂ she said, nodding toward
 the key plate beneath the lever. 
 
Langdon™s pulse leaped. 
 
Anderson cleared his throat, sounding uneasy. ﬁMa™am, I™m waiting for news on a 
secondary key. I am not sure I™m comfortable blasting our way intoŠﬂ 
 
ﬁPerhaps you™d be more comfortable in 
prison for obstructing a CIA investigation?ﬂ 
 
Anderson looked incredulous. Afte
r a long beat, he reluctantl
y handed the light to Sato 
and unsnapped his holster. 
 
ﬁWait!ﬂ Langdon said, no longer able to stand 
idly by. ﬁThink about it. Peter gave up his 
right hand rather than reveal 
whatever might be behind this
 door. Are you sure we want 
to do this? Unlocking this door is essentially 
complying with the demands of a terrorist.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo you want to get Peter Solomon back?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
ﬁOf course, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThen I suggest you do exactly wh
at his captor is requesting.ﬂ 
 
ﬁUnlock an ancient portal? You think 
this
 is the portal?ﬂ 
 
Sato shone the light in Langdon™s face. ﬁProfess
or, I have no idea what the hell this is. 
Whether it™s a storage unit or the secret en
trance to an ancient pyr
amid, I intend to open 
it. Do I make myself clear?ﬂ 
 
Langdon squinted into the light and finally nodded. 
 
Sato lowered the beam and redirected it at 
the door™s antique ke
y plate. ﬁChief? Go 
ahead.ﬂ 
 
Still looking averse to the pl
an, Anderson extracted his sid
earm very, very slowly, gazing 
down at it with uncertainty. 
 
ﬁOh, for God™s sake!ﬂ Sato™s tiny hands shot
 out, and she grabbed the weapon from him. 
She stuffed the flashlight into his now empty palm. ﬁShine the damned light.ﬂ She 
handled the gun with the conf
idence of someone who had tr
ained with weapons, wasting 
no time turning off the pistol™s safety, cocking the weapon, and aiming at the lock. 
 
ﬁWait!ﬂ
 Langdon yelled, but he was too late. 
 
The gun roared three times. 
 
Langdon™s eardrums felt like they had exploded. 
Is she insane?!
 The gunshots in the tiny 
space had been deafening. 
 
Anderson also looked shaken, his hand wavering
 a bit as he shone the flashlight on the 
bullet-riddled door. 
 
The lock mechanism was now in tatters, th
e wood surrounding it entirely pulverized. The 
lock had released, the door now having fallen ajar. 
 
Sato extended the pistol and pressed the tip 
of the barrel against 
the door, giving it a 
push. The door swung fully into the blackness beyond. 
 
Langdon peered in but could see nothing in the darkness. 
What in the world is that smell?
 
An unusual, fetid odor wafted out of the darkness. 
 
Anderson stepped into the doorway and shone
 the light on the fl
oor, tracing carefully 
down the length of the barren dirt floor. This room was like the othersŠa long, narrow 
space. The sidewalls were rugged stone, givi
ng the room the feel of an ancient prison 
cell. 
But that smell . . .
 
 
ﬁThere™s nothing here,ﬂ Anderson said, movi
ng the beam farther down the chamber floor. 
Finally, as the beam reached the end of the 
floor, he raised it up to illuminate the 
chamber™s farthest wall. 
 
ﬁMy God . . . !ﬂ Anderson shouted. 
 
Everyone saw it and jumped back. 
 
Langdon stared in disbelief at the 
deepest recess of the chamber. 
 
To his horror, something was staring back. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 36 
 
 
 
ﬁWhat in
 God™s name . . . ?ﬂ At the threshol
d of SBB13, Anderson fumbled with his 
light and retreated a step. 
 
Langdon also recoiled, as did Sato, who l
ooked startled for the first time all night. 
 
Sato aimed the gun at the back wall and moti
oned for Anderson to shine the light again. 
Anderson raised the light. The beam was dim by the time it reached the far wall, but the 
light was enough to illuminate the shape of a pa
llid and ghostly face, staring back at them 
through lifeless sockets. 
 
A human skull.
 
 
The skull sat atop a rickety wooden desk positio
ned against the rear wall of the chamber. 
Two human leg bones sat beside the skull, al
ong with a collection of other items that 
were meticulously arranged on the desk in shrinelike fashionŠan antique hourglass, a 
crystal flask, a candle, two sa
ucers of pale powder, and a sheet of paper. Propped against 
the wall beside the desk stood the fearsome sh
ape of a long scythe, its curved blade as 
familiar as that of the grim reaper. 
 
Sato stepped into the room. ﬁWell, now . . 
. it appears Peter Solomon keeps more secrets 
than I imagined.ﬂ 
 
Anderson nodded, inching after her. ﬁTalk about 
skeletons in your clos
et.ﬂ He raised the 
light and surveyed the rest of
 the empty chamber. ﬁAnd that 
smell
?ﬂ he added, crinkling 
his nose. ﬁWhat is it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁSulfur,ﬂ Langdon replied evenly behind them. 
ﬁThere should be two saucers on the desk. 
The saucer on the right will contain salt. And the other sulfur.ﬂ 
 
Sato wheeled in disbelief. 
ﬁHow the hell would you know 
that
?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁBecause, ma™am, there are rooms exac
tly like this all over the world.ﬂ 
 
One story above the subbasement, Capitol secu
rity guard Nuñez escorted the Architect of 
the Capitol, Warren Bellamy, down the long ha
llway that ran the length of the eastern 
basement. Nuñez could have sworn that he
 had just heard three gunshots down here, 
muffled and underground. 
 
There™s no way.
 
 
ﬁSubbasement door is open,ﬂ Bellamy said, 
squinting down the hallway at a door that 
stood ajar in the distance. 
 
Strange evening indeed,
 Nuñez thought. 
Nobody goes down there.
 ﬁI™ll be glad to find out 
what™s going on,ﬂ he said, reaching for his radio. 
 
ﬁGo back to your duties,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁI™m fine from here.ﬂ 
 
Nuñez shifted uneasily. ﬁYou sure?ﬂ 
 
Warren Bellamy stopped, placing a firm hand 
on Nuñez™s shoulder. ﬁSon, I™ve worked 
here for twenty-five years. I think I can find my way.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 37 
 
 
 
Mal™akh had
 seen some eerie spaces in his life, but few rivaled the unearthly world of 
Pod 3. 
Wet Pod.
 The massive room looked as if a ma
d scientist had taken over a Walmart 
and packed every aisle and shelf with specime
n jars of all shapes and sizes. Lit like a 
photographic darkroom, the space was bathed 
in a reddish haze of ﬁsafelightﬂ that 
emanated from beneath the shelves, filtering 
upward and illuminating the ethanol-filled 
containers. The clinical smell of pr
eservative chemicals was nauseating. 
 
ﬁThis pod houses over twenty thousand speci
es,ﬂ the chubby girl was saying. ﬁFish, 
rodents, mammals, reptiles.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAll 
dead,
 I hope?ﬂ Mal™akh asked, making 
a show of sounding nervous. 
 
The girl laughed. ﬁYes, yes. All very much dead. I™ll admit, I didn™t dare come in for at 
least six months after I started work.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh could understand why. Everywhere he 
looked there were spec
imen jars of dead 
life-formsŠsalamanders, jellyfish, rats, bugs, bi
rds, and other things he could not begin 
to identify. As if this co
llection were not unsettling enough on its own, the hazy red 
safelights that protected thes
e photosensitive specimens from long-term light exposure 
gave the visitor the feeling 
he was standing inside a gi
ant aquarium, where lifeless 
creatures were somehow congrega
ting to watch from the shadows. 
 
ﬁThat™s a coelacanth,ﬂ the girl said, pointing 
to a big Plexiglas container that held the 
ugliest fish Mal™akh had ever 
seen. ﬁThey were thought to be
 extinct with the dinosaurs, 
but this was caught off Africa a few year
s back and donated to the Smithsonian.ﬂ 
 
Lucky you,
 Mal™akh thought, barely listening. 
He was busy scanning the walls for 
security cameras. He saw only oneŠtra
ined on the entry 
doorŠnot surprising, 
considering that entrance wa
s probably the only way in. 
 
ﬁAnd here is what you wanted to see . . .ﬂ sh
e said, leading him to the giant tank he had 
seen from the window. ﬁOur 
longest specimen.ﬂ She swept her arm out over the vile 
creature like a game-show host disp
laying a new car. ﬁArchiteuthis.ﬂ 
 
The squid tank looked like a series of glass phone
 booths had been laid on their sides and 
fused end to end. Within the long, clear Plex
iglas coffin hovered a sickeningly pale and 
amorphous shape. Mal™akh gazed down at the bulbous, saclike head and its basketball-
size eyes. ﬁAlmost makes your coel
acanth look handsome,ﬂ he said. 
 
ﬁWait till you see her lit.ﬂ 
 
Trish flipped back the long lid
 of the tank. Ethanol fumes wa
fted out as she reached down 
into the tank and flipped a sw
itch just above the liquid line. 
A string of fluorescent lights 
flickered to life along the entire base of th
e tank. Architeuthis was now shining in all her 
gloryŠa colossal head attached to a slither
y mass of decaying tentacles and razor-sharp 
suckers. 
 
She began talking about how
 Architeuthis could beat a sperm whale in a fight. 
 
Mal™akh heard only empty prattling. 
 
The time had come. 
 
Trish Dunne always felt a bit 
uneasy in Pod 3, but the chill 
that had just run through her 
felt different. 
 
Visceral. Primal. 
 
She tried to ignore it, but it grew quickly 
now, clawing deeply at her. Although Trish 
could not seem to place the source of her anxi
ety, her gut was clearly telling her it was 
time to leave. 
 
ﬁAnyhow, that™s the squid,ﬂ she said, reaching 
into the tank and turning off the display 
light. ﬁWe should probably ge
t back to Katherine™sŠﬂ 
 
A broad palm clamped hard over her mouth, ya
nking her head back. Instantly, a powerful 
arm was wrapped around her torso, pinning her 
against a rock-hard 
chest. For a split 
second, Trish went numb with shock. 
 
Then came the terror. 
 
The man groped across her chest, grabbing her key card and yanking down hard. The 
cord burned the back of her neck before sna
pping. The key card fell 
on the floor at their 
feet. She fought, trying to twist away, but
 she was no match for the man™s size and 
strength. She tried to scream, but his hand remained tightly across her mouth. He leaned 
down and placed his mouth next to her ear, 
whispering, ﬁWhen I take my hand off your 
mouth, you will not scream, is that clear?ﬂ 
 
She nodded vigorously, her lungs burning for air. 
I can™t breathe!
 
 
The man removed his hand from her mouth, and Trish gasped, inhaling deeply. 
 
ﬁLet me go!ﬂ she demanded, breathle
ss. ﬁWhat the hell are you doing?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTell me your PIN number,ﬂ the man said. 
 
Trish felt totally at a loss. 
Katherine! Help! Who is this man?!
 ﬁSecurity can see you!ﬂ 
she said, knowing full well they we
re out of range of the cameras. 
And nobody is 
watching anyway.
 
 
ﬁYour PIN number,ﬂ the man repeated. ﬁT
he one that matches your key card.ﬂ 
 
An icy fear churned in her gut, and Tris
h spun violently, wriggling an arm free and 
twisting around, clawing at th
e man™s eyes. Her fingers hit flesh and raked down one 
cheek. Four dark gashes opene
d on his flesh where she scratched him. Then she realized 
the dark stripes on his flesh were not 
blood. The man was wearing makeup, which she 
had just scratched off, reveali
ng dark tattoos hidden underneath. 
 
Who is this monster?!
 
 
With seemingly superhuman strength, the man spun her around and hoisted her up, 
pushing her out over the open squid tank, her 
face now over the ethanol. The fumes 
burned her nostrils. 
 
ﬁWhat is your PIN number?ﬂ he repeated. 
 
Her eyes burned, and she could see the pale 
flesh of the squid submerged beneath her 
face. 
 
ﬁTell me,ﬂ he said, pushing her face cl
oser to the surface. ﬁWhat is it?ﬂ 
 
Her throat was burning now. ﬁZero-eight-zero-fo
ur!ﬂ she blurted, barely able to breathe. 
ﬁLet me go! Zero-eight-zero-four!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIf you™re lying,ﬂ he said, 
pushing down farther, her ha
ir in the ethanol now. 
 
ﬁI™m not lying!ﬂ she said, coughing.
 ﬁAugust 4! It™s my birthday!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you, Trish.ﬂ 
 
His powerful hands clasped her head ti
ghter, and a crushing force rammed her 
downward, plunging her face into the tank. Se
aring pain burned her eyes. The man 
pressed down harder, driving her whole head
 under the ethanol. Trish felt her face 
pressing into the fleshy head of the squid. 
 
Summoning all of her strength, she bucked viol
ently, arching backward, trying to pull her 
head out of the tank. But the powerful hands did not budge. 
 
I have to breathe!
 
 
She remained submerged, straining not to ope
n her eyes or mouth. 
Her lungs burned as 
she fought the powerful urge to breathe in. 
No! Don™t!
 But Trish™s inhalation reflex 
finally took over. 
 
Her mouth flew open, and her lungs expanded vi
olently, attempting to suck in the oxygen 
that her body craved. In a sear
ing rush, a wave of ethanol 
poured into her mouth. As the 
chemicals gushed down her throat
 into her lungs, Trish felt 
a pain like nothing she had 
ever imagined possible. Mercifully, it last
ed only a few seconds before her world went 
black. 
 
Mal™akh stood beside the 
tank, catching his breath and surveying the damage. 
 
The lifeless woman lay slumped over the rim 
of the tank, her face 
still submerged in 
ethanol. Seeing her there, Mal™akh flashed on 
the only other woman he
 had ever killed. 
 
Isabel Solomon. 
 
Long ago. Another life.
 
 
Mal™akh gazed down now at the woman™s flacci
d corpse. He grabbed her ample hips and 
lifted with his legs, hoisting her up, pushing 
forward, until she began 
to slide over the rim 
of the squid tank. Trish Dunne slithered headfi
rst down into the ethanol. The rest of her 
body followed, sloshing down. Gradually, the 
ripples subsided, leaving the woman 
hovering limp over the huge sea creature. As he
r clothing got heavier, she began to sink, 
slipping into the darkness. Bit by bit, Tr
ish Dunne™s body settled on top of the great 
beast. 
 
Mal™akh wiped his hands and replaced 
the Plexiglas lid, sealing the tank. 
 
Wet Pod has a new specimen.
 
 
He retrieved Trish™s key card from th
e floor and slipped it in his pocket: 
0804.
 
 
When Mal™akh had first seen Trish in the lobby, 
he™d seen a liability. Then he™d realized 
her key card and password were his insurance.
 If Katherine™s data-s
torage room was as 
secure as Peter had implied, then Mal™akh 
was anticipating some challenges persuading 
Katherine to unlock it for him. 
I now have my own set of keys.
 He was pleased to know he 
would no longer have to waste time
 bending Katherine to his will. 
 
As Mal™akh stood up straight, he saw his own 
reflection in the window and could tell his 
makeup was badly mangled. It 
didn™t matter anymore. By the time Katherine put it all 
together, it would be too late. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 38 
 
 
 
ﬁThis room
 is Masonic?ﬂ Sato demanded, turning 
from the skull and staring at Langdon 
in the darkness. 
 
Langdon nodded calmly. ﬁIt™s called a Chamber of
 Reflection. These rooms are designed 
as cold, austere places in which a Mason can
 reflect on his own mortality. By meditating 
on the inevitability of death, 
a Mason gains a valuable pers
pective on the fleeting nature 
of life.ﬂ 
 
Sato looked around the eerie space, apparently
 not convinced. ﬁThis is some kind of 
meditation
 room?ﬂ 
 
ﬁEssentially, yes. These chambers always
 incorporate the same
 symbolsŠskull and 
crossed bones, scythe, hourglass, sulfur, sa
lt, blank paper, a candle, et cetera. The 
symbols of death inspire Masons to ponder how
 better to lead thei
r lives while on this 
earth.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt looks like a death 
shrine,ﬂ Anderson said. 
 
That™s kind of the point
. ﬁMost of my symbology students have the same reaction at 
first.ﬂ Langdon often assigned them 
Symbols of Freemasonry
 by Beresniak, which 
contained beautiful photos of Chambers of Reflection. 
 
ﬁAnd your students,ﬂ Sato demanded, ﬁdon™t fi
nd it unnerving that Masons meditate with 
skulls and scythes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo more unnerving than Christia
ns praying at the feet of a 
man nailed to a cross, or 
Hindus chanting in front of 
a four-armed elephant named Ganesh. Misunderstanding a 
culture™s symbols is a co
mmon root of prejudice.ﬂ 
 
Sato turned away, apparently in no mood for 
a lecture. She moved 
toward the table of 
artifacts. Anderson tried to lig
ht her way with the flashlig
ht, but the beam was beginning 
to dim. He tapped the heel of the light 
and coaxed it to burn a little brighter. 
 
As the threesome moved deeper into the narr
ow space, the pungent tang of sulfur filled 
Langdon™s nostrils. The subbasement was da
mp, and the humidity in the air was 
activating the sulfur in the bowl. Sato arrived 
at the table and stared
 down at the skull and 
accompanying objects. 
 
Anderson joined her, doing his 
best to light the desk with
 the weakening beam of his 
flashlight. 
 
Sato examined everything on the table and then placed her hands on her hips, sighing. 
ﬁWhat is all this junk?ﬂ 
 
The artifacts in this room, Langdon knew, 
were carefully selected and arranged. 
ﬁSymbols of transformation,ﬂ he told her, f
eeling confined as he inched forward and 
joined them at the tabl
e. ﬁThe skull, or c
aput mortuum,
 represents man™s final 
transformation through decay; it™s a reminder that
 we all shed our mortal flesh one day. 
The sulfur and salt are alchemical catalysts 
that facilitate transformation. The hourglass 
represents the transformati
onal power of time.ﬂ He moti
oned to the unlit candle. ﬁAnd 
this candle represents the formative primordi
al fire and the awaken
ing of man from his 
ignorant slumberŠtransforma
tion through illumination.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd . . . 
that
?ﬂ Sato asked, pointin
g into the corner. 
 
Anderson swung his dimming flashlight beam to 
the giant scythe that leaned against the 
back wall. 
 
ﬁNot a death symbol, as most assume,ﬂ Langdon 
said. ﬁThe scythe is actually a symbol of 
the transformative nourishment of nature
Šthe reaping of nature™s gifts.ﬂ 
 
Sato and Anderson fell silent, apparently 
trying to process thei
r bizarre surroundings. 
 
Langdon wanted nothing more than to get out of
 the place. ﬁI realize this room may seem 
unusual,ﬂ he told them, ﬁbut there™s nothing to 
see here; it™s really 
quite normal. A lot of 
Masonic lodges have chambers exactly like this one.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut this is not a Masonic l
odge!ﬂAnderson declared. ﬁIt™s the 
U.S. Capitol, and I™d like 
to know what the hell this r
oom is doing in my building.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSometimes Masons set aside rooms like this
 in their offices or private homes as 
meditation spaces. It is not uncommon.ﬂ Langdon knew a heart surgeon in Boston who 
had converted a closet in his office into a 
Masonic Chamber of Reflection so he could 
ponder mortality before going into surgery. 
 
Sato looked troubled. ﬁYou™re saying Pete
r Solomon comes down here to reflect on 
death?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI really don™t know,ﬂ Langdon said sincerely. ﬁM
aybe he created it as a sanctuary for his 
Masonic brothers who work in the building, gi
ving them a spiritual sanctuary away from 
the chaos of the material world . . . a place 
for a powerful lawmaker to reflect before 
making decisions that affect his fellow man.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLovely sentiment,ﬂ Sato said, her tone sarc
astic, ﬁbut I have a feeling Americans might 
have a problem with their 
leaders praying in closets 
with scythes and skulls.ﬂ 
 
Well, they shouldn™t,
 Langdon thought, imagining how differe
nt a world it might be if 
more leaders took time to ponder the finality of death before racing off to war. 
 
Sato pursed her lips and carefully surveyed 
all four corners of the candle lit chamber. 
ﬁThere must be 
something
 in here besides human bones and bowls of chemicals, 
Professor. Someone transported you all the wa
y from your home in 
Cambridge to be in 
this precise room.ﬂ 
 
Langdon clutched his daybag to his side, stil
l unable to imagine how the package he 
carried might relate to this chamber. ﬁMa™
am, I™m sorry, but I don™
t see anything out of 
the ordinary here.ﬂ Langdon hoped that now at
 last they could get to the business of 
trying to find Peter. 
 
Anderson™s light flickered again, and Sato spun 
on him, her temper starting to show. ﬁFor 
Christ™s sake, is it too much to ask?ﬂ 
She plunged her hand into her pocket and yanked 
out a cigarette lighter. Striking her thumb on the flint, she held out the flame and lit the 
desk™s lone candle. The wick sputte
red and then caught, spreading a ghostly 
luminescence throughout the constricted space.
 Long shadows raked the stone walls. As 
the flame grew brighter, an unexpected
 sight materialized before them. 
 
ﬁLook!ﬂ Anderson said, pointing. 
 
In the candlelight, they could now see a fa
ded patch of graffitiŠseven capital letters 
scrawled across the rear wall. 
VITRIOL
 
 
 
ﬁAn odd choice of word,ﬂ Sato said as the 
candlelight cast a fri
ghtening skull-shaped 
silhouette acro
ss the letters. 
 
ﬁActually, it™s an acronym,ﬂ Langdon said. 
ﬁIt™s written on the 
rear wall of most 
chambers like this as a shorthand for the Masonic meditative mantra: 
Visita interiora 
terrae, rectificando invenies occultum lapidem
.ﬂ 
 
Sato eyed him, looking almost impressed. ﬁMeaning?ﬂ 
 
ﬁVisit the interior of the earth, and by 
rectifying, you will find the hidden stone.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s gaze sharpened. ﬁDoes the hidden
 stone have any connection to a hidden 
pyramid?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shrugged, not wanting to encour
age the comparison. ﬁThose who enjoy 
fantasizing about hidden pyramids in
 Washington would tell you that 
occultum lapidem
 
refers to the stone pyramid, yes. Others w
ill tell you it™s a referen
ce to the Philosopher™s 
StoneŠa substance alchemists be
lieved could bring them everlas
ting life or turn lead into 
gold. Others claim it™s a reference to the Holy
 of Holies, a hidden stone chamber at the 
core of the Great Temple. Some say it™s a Ch
ristian reference to th
e hidden teachings of 
Saint PeterŠthe Rock. Every esoteric traditi
on interprets ‚the stone
™ in its own way, but 
invariably the 
occultum lapidem
 is a source of power and enlightenment.ﬂ 
 
Anderson cleared his throat. ﬁI
s it possible Solomon lied to th
is guy? Maybe he told him 
there was something down here . 
. . and there really isn™t.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was having similar thoughts
.
 
 
Without warning, the candle flame flickered, 
as if caught by a draft. It dimmed for a 
moment and then recovered, burning brightly again. 
 
ﬁThat™s odd,ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁI hope no one clos
ed the door upstairs.ﬂ He strode out of 
the chamber into the darkne
ss of the hallway. ﬁHello?ﬂ 
 
Langdon barely noticed him leave. His gaze ha
d been drawn suddenly to the rear wall. 
What just happened?
 
 
ﬁDid you see that?ﬂ Sato asked, also 
staring with alarm at the wall. 
 
Langdon nodded, his pulse quickening. 
What did I just see?
 
 
A moment earlier, the rear wall seemed to ha
ve shimmered, as if a 
ripple of energy had 
passed through it. 
 
Anderson now strode back into the room. ﬁN
o one™s out there.ﬂ As he entered, the wall 
shimmered again. ﬁHoly shit!ﬂ he exclaimed, jumping back. 
 
All three stood mute for a long moment, star
ing in unison at the back wall. Langdon felt 
another chill run through him as he realiz
ed what they were seeing. He reached out 
tentatively, until his fingertips touched the rear
 surface of the chamber. ﬁIt™s not a wall,ﬂ 
he said. 
 
Anderson and Sato stepped 
closer, peering intently. 
 
ﬁIt™s a canvas,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁBut it billowed,ﬂ Sato said quickly. 
 
Yes, in a very strange way.
 Langdon examined the surface more closely. The sheen on the 
canvas had refracted the candle
light in a startling manner because the canvas had just 
billowed 
away
 from the room . . . fluttering backward 
through
 the plane of the rear wall. 
 
Langdon extended his outstretched fingers very gently, pressing the canvas backward. 
Startled, he yanked his hand back. 
There™s an opening!
 
 
ﬁPull it aside,ﬂ Sato ordered. 
 
Langdon™s heart pounded wildly now. He reached up and clutched the edge of the canvas 
banner, slowly pulling the fabric to one side. 
He stared in disbelie
f at what lay hidden 
behind it. 
My God.
 
 
Sato and Anderson stood in stunned silence 
as they looked through 
the opening in the 
rear wall. 
 
Finally, Sato spoke. ﬁIt appears we™ve just found our pyramid.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 39 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 stared at the opening in the rear
 wall of the chamber. Hidden behind 
the canvas banner, a perfectly square hole 
had been hollowed out of the wall. The 
opening, about three feet across,
 appeared to have been cr
eated by removing a series of 
bricks. For a moment, in the darkness, Langdon 
thought the hole was a window to a room 
beyond. 
 
Now he saw it was not. 
 
The opening extended only a few feet into 
the wall before terminating. Like a rough-
hewn cubbyhole, the recessed niche reminded 
Langdon of a museum alcove designed to 
hold a statuette. Fittingly, this niche displayed one small object. 
 
About nine inches tall, it wa
s a piece of carved, solid gran
ite. The surface was elegant 
and smooth with four polished side
s that shone in the candlelight. 
 
Langdon could not fathom what it was doing here. 
A stone pyramid?
 
 
ﬁFrom your look of surprise,ﬂ Sato said, sounding
 self-satisfied, ﬁI take it this object is 
not 
typical
 within a Chamber of Reflection?ﬂ  
 
Langdon shook his head.  
 
ﬁThen perhaps you would like to reassess your pr
evious claims regarding the legend of a 
Masonic Pyramid hidden in Washington?ﬂ Her tone now was almost smug. 
 
ﬁDirector,ﬂ Langdon replied instan
tly, ﬁthis little pyramid is 
not
 the Masonic Pyramid.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo it is merely coincidence that we found 
a pyramid hidden at the heart of the U.S. 
Capitol in a secret chamber be
longing to a Masonic leader?ﬂ 
 
Langdon rubbed his eyes and tried to think 
clearly. ﬁMa™am, this pyramid doesn™t 
resemble the myth in any way. The Masonic Py
ramid is described as enormous, with a tip 
forged of solid gold.ﬂ 
 
Moreover, Langdon knew, this little pyram
idŠwith its flat topŠwas not even a 
true
 
pyramid. Without its tip, this was another sy
mbol entirely. Known as an Unfinished 
Pyramid, it was a symbolic reminder that ma
n™s ascent to his full human potential was 
always a work in progress. Though few reali
zed it, this symbol was the most widely 
published symbol on earth. 
Over twenty billion in print.
 Adorning every one-dollar bill in 
circulation, the Unfinished Pyramid waited 
patiently for its shining capstone, which 
hovered above it as a reminder of America™s ye
t-unfulfilled destiny and the work yet to 
be done, both as a country and as individuals. 
 
ﬁLift it down,ﬂ Sato said to A
nderson, motioning to 
the pyramid. ﬁI want a closer look.ﬂ 
She began making room on the desk by shoving 
the skull and crossed bones to one side 
with no reverence whatsoever. 
 
Langdon was starting to feel like they we
re common grave robbers, desecrating a 
personal shrine. 
 
Anderson maneuvered past Langdon, reached into
 the niche, and clamped his large palms 
on either side of the pyramid. Then, barely able
 to lift at this awkward angle, he slid the 
pyramid toward him and lowered it with a 
hard thud onto the wooden desk. He stepped 
back to give Sato room. 
 
The director repositioned the candle close to 
the pyramid and studied its polished surface. 
Slowly, she ran her tiny fingers over it, examinin
g every inch of the fl
at top, and then the 
sides. She wrapped her hands around to feel
 the back, then frowned in apparent 
disappointment. ﬁProfessor, earlier you said 
the Masonic Pyramid was constructed to 
protect secret information.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s the legend, yes.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo, hypothetically speaking, if
 Peter™s captor believed 
this
 was the Masonic Pyramid, he 
would believe it contained powerful information.ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded, exasperated. ﬁYes, although even if he found this information, he 
probably would not be able to 
read
 it. According to legend, th
e contents of the pyramid 
are encoded, making them indecipherabl
e . . . except to the most worthy.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI beg your pardon?ﬂ 
 
Despite Langdon™s growing impatience, he re
plied with an even
 tone. ﬁMythological 
treasures are 
always
 protected by tests of worthiness. As you may recall, in the legend of 
the Sword in the Stone, the stone refuses to 
give up the sword except to Arthur, who was 
spiritually prepared to wield the sword™s 
awesome power. The Masonic Pyramid is based 
on the same idea. In 
this
 case, the information is the treasu
re, and it is said
 to be written 
in an encoded languageŠa mystical tongue of lost wordsŠlegible 
only to the worthy.ﬂ 
 
A faint smile crossed Sato™s lips. ﬁThat may explain why you were summoned here 
tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 
 
Calmly, Sato rotated the pyramid in place, turning it a full 180 degrees. The pyramid™s 
fourth side now shone in the candlelight. 
 
Robert Langdon stared 
at it with surprise. 
 
ﬁIt appears,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁthat 
someone believes you™re worthy.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 40 
 
 
 
What™s taking
 Trish so long?
 
 
Katherine Solomon checked her watch again. 
She™d forgotten to warn Dr. Abaddon about 
the bizarre commute to her lab, but she coul
dn™t imagine the darkness had slowed them 
down this much. 
They should have arrived by now.
 
 
Katherine walked over to the exit and heaved
 open the lead-lined door, staring out into 
the void. She listened for a 
moment, but heard nothing. 
 
ﬁTrish?ﬂ she called out, her voice
 swallowed by the darkness. 
 
Silence. 
 
Puzzled, she closed the door, took out her 
cell phone, and called the lobby. ﬁThis is 
Katherine. Is Trish out there?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, ma™am,ﬂ the lobby guard said. ﬁShe and 
your guest headed back about ten minutes 
ago.ﬂ 
 
ﬁReally? I don™t think they™re 
even inside Pod Five yet.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHold on. I™ll check.ﬂ Katherine could hear th
e guard™s fingers clicking on his computer 
keyboard. ﬁYou™re right. According to Ms.
 Dunne™s key-card logs, she has not yet 
opened the Pod Five door. Her last access event 
was about eight minutes ago . . . at Pod 
Three. I guess she™s giving your guest
 a little tour on his way in.ﬂ 
 
Katherine frowned. 
Apparently
. The news was a bit odd, but at least she knew Trish 
wouldn™t be long in Pod 3. 
The smell in there is terrible.
 ﬁThanks. Has my brother arrived 
yet?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, ma™am, not yet.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you.ﬂ 
 
As Katherine hung up, she felt an unexpected twinge of trepidati
on. The uneasy feeling 
made her pause, but only for a moment. It wa
s the same exact disquiet she™d felt earlier 
when she stepped into Dr. Abaddon™s house. 
Embarrassingly, her feminine intuition had 
failed her there. Badly. 
 
It™s nothing,
 Katherine told herself. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 41 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 studied the stone pyramid. 
This isn™t possible.
 
 
ﬁAn ancient encoded language,ﬂ Sato said
 without looking up. ﬁTell me, does this 
qualify?ﬂ 
 
On the newly exposed face of the pyramid, a se
ries of sixteen characters was precisely 
engraved into the smooth stone. 
 
 
 
Beside Langdon, Anderson™s mouth now 
gaped open, mirroring Langdon™s own shock. 
The security chief looked like he had just seen some kind of alien keypad. 
 
ﬁProfessor?ﬂ Sato said. ﬁI 
assume you can read this?ﬂ 
 
Langdon turned. ﬁWhy would you assume that?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBecause you were 
brought
 here, Professor. You were chos
en. This inscription appears to 
be a code of some sort, and considering your
 reputation, it seems obvious to me that you 
were brought here to decipher it.ﬂ 
 
Langdon had to admit that after his experien
ces in Rome and Paris, he™d received a 
steady flow of requests asking for his help de
ciphering some of hi
story™s great unsolved 
codesŠthe Phaistos Disk, the Dorabella Ci
pher, the mysterious 
Voynich Manuscript. 
 
Sato ran her finger over the in
scription. ﬁCan you tell me th
e meaning of these icons?ﬂ 
 
They™re not icons,
 Langdon thought
. They™re symbols.
 The language was one he had 
recognized immediatelyŠan encrypted cipher
 language from the seventeenth century. 
Langdon knew very well how to break it. ﬁMa™
am,ﬂ he said, fee
ling hesitant, ﬁthis 
pyramid is Peter™s 
private
 property.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPrivate or not, if this co
de is indeed the reason you we
re brought to Washington, I am 
not giving you a choice in the matter.
 I want to know what it says.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s BlackBerry pinged loudly, and she ya
nked the device from her pocket, studying 
the incoming message for several moments. Langdon was amazed that the Capitol 
Building™s internal wireless networ
k provided service this far down. 
 
Sato grunted and raised her ey
ebrows, giving Langdon an odd look. 
 
ﬁChief Anderson?ﬂ she sa
id, turning to him. ﬁA word in 
private, if I may?ﬂ The director 
motioned for Anderson to join her, and they
 disappeared into the pitch-black hallway, 
leaving Langdon alone in the flickering candlelight of Peter™s Chamber of Reflection. 
 
Chief Anderson wondered when this night would end. 
A severed hand in my Rotunda? A 
death shrine in my basement? Biza
rre engravings on a stone pyramid?
 Somehow, the 
Redskins game no longer felt significant. 
 
As he followed Sato into the darkness of th
e hall, Anderson flicked on his flashlight. The 
beam was weak but better than
 nothing. Sato led him down the hall a few yards, out of 
sight of Langdon. 
 
ﬁHave a look at this,ﬂ she whispe
red, handing Anderson her BlackBerry. 
 
Anderson took the device and squinted at th
e illuminated screen. It displayed a black-
and-white imageŠthe X-ray of Langdon™s bag th
at Anderson had requested be sent to 
Sato. As in all X-rays, the objec
ts of greatest density appeared in the brightest white. In 
Langdon™s bag, a lone item outs
hone everything else. Obviously extremely dense, the 
object glowed like a dazzling jewel in a mur
ky jumble of other items. Its shape was 
unmistakable. 
 
He™s been carrying that all night?
 Anderson looked over at Sato in surprise. ﬁWhy didn™t 
Langdon mention this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁDamned good question,ﬂ Sato whispered. 
 
ﬁThe shape . . . it can™t be coincidence.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Sato said, her tone a
ngry now. ﬁI would say not.ﬂ 
 
A faint rustle in the corridor drew Anderson™
s attention. Startled, he 
pointed his flashlight 
down the black passageway. The dying beam rev
ealed only a deserted corridor, lined 
with open doors. 
 
ﬁHello?ﬂ Anderson sai
d. ﬁIs somebody there?ﬂ  
 
Silence.  
 
Sato gave him an odd look, appa
rently having heard nothing.  
 
Anderson listened a moment longer and then shook it off. 
I™ve got to get out of here.
 
 
Alone in the candlelit chamber, Langdon ran hi
s fingers over the sharply carved edges of 
the pyramid™s engraving. He was curious to know what the message said, and yet he was 
not about to intrude on Peter Solomon™s pr
ivacy any more than they already had. 
And 
why would this lunatic care about this small pyramid anyway?
 
 
ﬁWe have a problem, Professor,ﬂ Sato™s voi
ce declared loudly behind him. ﬁI™ve just 
received a new piece of information, and I™ve had enough of your lies.ﬂ 
 
Langdon turned to see the OS director marchi
ng in, BlackBerry in hand and fire in her 
eyes. Taken aback, Langdon looked to Anderson 
for help, but the chief was now standing 
guard at the door, his expre
ssion unsympathetic. Sato arri
ved in front of Langdon and 
thrust her BlackBerry in his face. 
 
Bewildered, Langdon looked at the screen, whic
h displayed an invert
ed black-and-white 
photograph, like a ghostly film negative. The 
photo looked like a jumble of objects, and 
one of them shone very brightly. Though as
kew and off center, the brightest object was 
clearly a little, pointed pyramid. 
 
A tiny pyramid?
 Langdon looked at Sato. ﬁWhat is this?ﬂ 
 
The question seemed only to incense Sato 
further. ﬁYou™re pretending you don™t know?ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s temper flared. ﬁI™m not 
pretending
 anything! I™ve never seen
 this before in my 
life!ﬂ 
 
ﬁBullshit!ﬂ Sato snapped, her voice cutting 
through the musty air. 
ﬁYou™ve been carrying 
it in your bag all night!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIŠﬂ Langdon stalled midsentence. His eyes
 moved slowly down to the daybag on his 
shoulder. Then he raised th
em again to the BlackBerry. 
My God . . . the package.
 He 
looked more closely at the image. Now he 
saw it. A ghostly cube, enclosing the pyramid. 
Stunned, Langdon realized he was looking at an X
-ray of his bag . . . and also of Peter™s 
mysterious cube-shaped package. The cube
 was, in fact, a hollow box . . . a small 
pyramid. 
 
Langdon opened his mouth to speak, but his wo
rds failed him. He felt the breath go out 
of his lungs as a new revelation struck him. 
 
Simple. Pure. Devastating. 
 
My God.
 He looked back at the truncated stone 
pyramid on the desk. Its apex was flatŠa 
small square areaŠa blank space symbolically awaiting its final piece . . . that piece 
which would transform it from an Unfinished Pyramid into a True Pyramid. 
 
Langdon now realized the tiny pyramid he wa
s carrying was not a pyramid at all. 
It™s a 
capstone.
 At that instant, he knew why he al
one could unlock the mysteries of this 
pyramid. 
 
I hold the final piece.
 
 
And it is indeed . . . a talisman.
 
 
When Peter had told Langdon the package contained a 
talisman,
 Langdon had laughed. 
Now he realized his friend wa
s right. This tiny capstone 
was
 a talisman, but not the magic 
kind . . . the far older kind. Long before 
talisman
 had magical connotations, it had 
another meaningŠﬁcompletion.ﬂ From the Greek 
telesma
, meaning ﬁcomplete,ﬂ a 
talisman was any object or idea that 
completed another and made it whole. 
The finishing 
element.
 A capstone, symbolically speaking, was 
the ultimate talisman, transforming the 
Unfinished Pyramid into a sym
bol of completed perfection. 
 
Langdon now felt an eerie convergence that forc
ed him to accept one very strange truth: 
with the exception of its size,
 the stone pyramid in Peter™s Chamber of Reflection seemed 
to be transforming itself, bit by bit, into something vaguely resembling the Masonic 
Pyramid of legend. 
 
From the brightness with which the capst
one shone on the X-ray, Langdon suspected it 
was made of metal . . . a very 
dense
 metal
.
 Whether or not it was solid gold, he had no 
way of knowing, and he was not about to let his mind start playing tricks on him. 
This 
pyramid is too small. The code™s too easy to
 read. And . . . it™s a myth, for heaven™s sake!
 
 
Sato was watching him. ﬁFor a bright man, 
Professor, you™ve made some dumb choices 
tonight. Lying to an intelligence director? In
tentionally obstructing a CIA investigation?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can explain, if you™ll let me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou will be explaining at CIA headquarters. 
As of this moment, I am detaining you.ﬂ  
 
Langdon™s body went rigid. ﬁYou can
™t possibly be serious.ﬂ  
 
ﬁDeadly serious. I made
 it very clear to you that the st
akes tonight were high, and you 
chose not to cooperate. I strongly sugges
t you start thinking about explaining the 
inscription on this pyramid, because when we
 arrive at the CIA . . .ﬂ She raised her 
BlackBerry and took a close-up snapshot of
 the engraving on the stone pyramid. ﬁMy 
analysts will have had a head start.ﬂ 
 
Langdon opened his mouth to protest, but Sato
 was already turning to Anderson at the 
door. ﬁChief,ﬂ she said, ﬁput the stone pyram
id in Langdon™s bag and carry it. I™ll handle 
taking Mr. Langdon into custody. Your weapon, if I may?ﬂ 
 
Anderson was stone-faced as he advanced 
into the chamber, unsnapping his shoulder 
holster as he came. He gave his gun to
 Sato, who immediately aimed it at Langdon. 
 
Langdon watched as if in a dream. 
This cannot be happening.
 
 
Anderson now came to Langdon and removed the daybag from his shoulder, carrying it 
over to the desk and setting it on the chai
r. He unzipped the bag, propped it open, and 
then hoisted the heavy stone pyramid off th
e desk and into the bag, along with Langdon™s 
notes and the tiny package. 
 
Suddenly there was a rustle of movement in the hallway. A dark outline of a man 
materialized in the doorway, rushing into
 the chamber and approaching fast behind 
Anderson. The chief never saw him coming. In 
an instant, the stranger had lowered his 
shoulder and crashed into Anderson™s bac
k. The chief launched forward, his head 
cracking into the edge of the stone niche. 
He fell hard, crumpling on the desk, sending 
bones and artifacts flying. The hourglass shatte
red on the floor. The candle toppled to the 
floor, still burning. 
 
Sato reeled amid the chaos, raising the gun, 
but the intruder grabbed a femur and lashed 
out with it, striking her shoulde
r with the leg bone. Sato let out a cry of pain and fell 
back, dropping the weapon. The newcomer kicked the gun away and then wheeled 
toward Langdon. The man was tall and slende
r, an elegant Afri
can American whom 
Langdon had never seen before in his life. 
 
ﬁGrab the pyramid!ﬂ the ma
n commanded. ﬁFollow me!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 42 
 
 
 
The African American
 man leading Langdon through the 
Capitol™s subterranean maze 
was clearly someone of power. Beyond knowing 
his way through all the side corridors 
and back rooms, the elegant 
stranger carried a key ring that seemed to unlock every door 
that blocked their way. 
 
Langdon followed, quickly running up an unfamiliar
 staircase. As they climbed, he felt 
the leather strap of his daybag cutting hard 
into his shoulder. The stone pyramid was so 
heavy that Langdon feared th
e bag™s strap might break. 
 
The past few minutes defied all logi
c, and now Langdon found himself moving on 
instinct alone. His gut told him to trust 
this stranger. Beyond saving Langdon from Sato™s 
arrest, the man had taken dangerous action 
to protect Peter Solomon™s mysterious 
pyramid. 
Whatever the pyramid may be.
 While his motivation remained a mystery, 
Langdon had glimpsed a telltale shimmer of
 gold on the man™s handŠa Masonic ringŠ
the double-headed phoenix and the number 33. This man and Peter Solomon were more 
than trusted friends. They were Mas
onic brothers of the highest degree. 
 
Langdon followed him to the top of the stairs, 
into another corridor, and then through an 
unmarked door into a utilitarian hallway. 
They ran past supply boxes and bags of 
garbage, veering off suddenly through a servi
ce door that deposited them in an utterly 
unexpected worldŠa plush movie theater of so
me sort. The older man led the way up the 
side aisle and out the main 
doors into the light of a larg
e atrium. Langdon now realized 
they were in the visitor center throug
h which he had entered earlier tonight. 
 
Unfortunately, so was a Capitol police officer. 
 
As they came face-to-face with the officer, al
l three men stopped, staring at one another. 
Langdon recognized the young Hispanic officer fro
m the X-ray machine 
earlier tonight. 
 
ﬁOfficer Nuñez,ﬂ the African American 
man said. ﬁNot a word. Follow me.ﬂ 
 
The guard looked uneasy but obeyed without question. 
 
Who is this guy?
 
 
The three of them hurried toward the southeas
t corner of the visitor center, where they 
arrived at a small foyer and a set of hea
vy doors blocked with orange pylons. The doors 
were sealed with masking tape, apparently 
to keep the dust of whatever was happening 
beyond out of the visitor center. The man reach
ed up and peeled off the tape on the door. 
Then he flipped through his key ring as he
 spoke to the guard. ﬁOur friend Chief 
Anderson is in the subbasement. He may 
be injured. You™ll want to check on him.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir.ﬂ Nuñez looked as baffled as he did alarmed. 
 
ﬁMost important, you did 
not
 see us.ﬂ The man found a key, took it off the key ring, and 
used it to turn the heavy dead bolt. He pulled 
open the steel door and 
tossed the key to the 
guard. ﬁLock this door behind us. Put the tape 
back on as best as you can. Pocket the key 
and say nothing. To 
anyone
. Including the chief. Is th
at clear, Officer Nuñez?ﬂ 
 
The guard eyed the key as if he™d just been
 entrusted with a precious gem. ﬁIt is, sir.ﬂ 
 
The man hurried through the door, and La
ngdon followed. The guard locked the heavy 
bolt behind them, and Langdon could hear
 him re-applying the masking tape. 
 
ﬁProfessor Langdon,ﬂ the man said as they strode briskly down a modern-looking 
corridor that was obviously under construc
tion. ﬁMy name is Warren Bellamy. Peter 
Solomon is a dear friend of mine.ﬂ 
 
Langdon shot a startled glance at the stately man. 
You™re Warren Bellamy?
 Langdon had 
never met the Architect of the Capitol, but he certainly knew the man™s name. 
 
ﬁPeter speaks very highly of
 you,ﬂ Bellamy said, ﬁand I™m sorry we are meeting under 
these dreadful circumstances.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter is in terrible 
trouble. His hand . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know.ﬂ Bellamy sounded grim. ﬁThat™s 
not the half of 
it, I™m afraid.ﬂ 
 
They reached the end of the lit section of 
corridor, and the passageway took an abrupt 
left. The remaining length of corridor,
 wherever it went, was pitch-black. 
 
ﬁHold on,ﬂ Bellamy said, disappearing into a nearby electrical room from which a tangle 
of heavy-duty orange extension cords snak
ed out, running away from them into the 
darkness of the corridor. Langdon waited wh
ile Bellamy rooted around inside. The 
Architect must have located the switch that 
sent power to the extension cords, because 
suddenly the route before them became illuminated. 
 
Langdon could only stare. 
 
Washington, D.C.Šlike RomeŠwas a city
 laced with secret passageways and 
underground tunnels. The passage befo
re them now reminded Langdon of the 
passetto
 
tunnel connecting the Vatican
 to Castel Sant™Angelo. 
Long. Dark. Narrow.
 Unlike the 
ancient 
passetto,
 however, this passage was modern and not yet complete. It was a 
slender construction zone that was so long it 
seemed to narrow to nothing at its distant 
end. The only lighting was a string of intermittent
 construction bulbs that did little more 
than accentuate the tunne
l™s impossible length. 
 
Bellamy was already heading down the pa
ssage. ﬁFollow me. Watch your step.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt himself fall into step behind Bella
my, wondering where on earth this tunnel 
led. 
 
At that moment, Mal™akh stepped out of Pod 
3 and strode briskly down the deserted main 
corridor of the SMSC toward Pod 5. He clutch
ed Trish™s key card in
 his hand and quietly 
whispered, ﬁZero-eight-zero-four.ﬂ 
 
Something else was cycling through his mind 
as well. Mal™akh had just received an 
urgent message from the Capitol Building. 
My contact has run into unforeseen 
difficulties.
 Even so, the news remained enc
ouraging: Robert Langdon now possessed 
both
 the pyramid and the capstone. Despite
 the unexpected way in which it had 
happened, the crucial pieces were falling into plac
e. It was almost as if destiny itself were 
guiding tonight™s events, ensuring Mal™akh™s victory. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 43 
 
 
 
Langdon hurried
 to keep pace with Warren Bellamy™
s brisk footsteps as they moved 
without a word down the long tunnel. So far, 
the Architect of the Capitol appeared far 
more intent on putting distance between Sato
 and this stone pyramid than he did on 
explaining to Langdon what was going on. La
ngdon had a growing apprehension that 
there was far more going on than he could imagine. 
 
The CIA? The Architect of the Capitol? Two Thirty-third-degree Masons?
 
 
The shrill sound of Langdon™s cell 
phone cut the air. He pulled his phone from his jacket. 
Uncertain, he answered. ﬁHello
?ﬂ The voice that spoke was an
 eerie, familiar whisper. 
ﬁProfessor, I hear you had unexpected company.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt an icy chill. ﬁWhere the he
ll is Peter?!ﬂ he demanded, his words 
reverberating in the en
closed tunnel. Beside him, Warre
n Bellamy glanced over, looking 
concerned and motioning fo
r Langdon to keep walking. 
 
ﬁDon™t worry,ﬂ the voice said. ﬁAs I told you, Peter is somewhere safe.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou cut off his hand, for God™s sake! He needs a doctor!ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe needs a priest,ﬂ the man replied. ﬁBut
 you can save him. If you do as I command, 
Peter will live. I give you my word.ﬂ  
 
ﬁThe word of a madman means nothing to me.ﬂ  
 
ﬁMadman? Professor, surely you appreciate th
e reverence with which I have adhered to 
the ancient protocols tonight. The Hand of 
the Mysteries guided
 you to a portalŠthe 
pyramid that promises to unveil ancient wisdom. I know you now possess it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou think 
this
 is the Masonic Pyramid?ﬂ Langdon de
manded. ﬁIt™s a chunk of rock.ﬂ 
 
There was silence on the other end of the 
line. ﬁMr. Langdon, you™re too smart to play 
dumb. You know very well what you™ve uncov
ered tonight. A stone pyramid . . . hidden 
at the core of Washington, D.
C. . . . by a powerful Mason?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re chasing a 
myth
! Whatever Peter told you
, he told you in fear. 
 
The Legend of the Masonic Pyramid is 
fiction.
 The Masons never built any pyramid to 
protect secret wisdom. And even if they did, 
this
 pyramid is far too small to be what you 
think it is.ﬂ 
 
The man chuckled. ﬁI see Peter has told
 you very little. Nonetheless, Mr. Langdon, 
whether or not you choose to accep
t what it is you now possess, you 
will
 do as I say. I am 
well aware that the pyramid you are carry
ing has an encrypted engraving. You 
will
 
decipher that engraving for me. Then, and only then, will I return Peter Solomon to you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhatever you believe this engraving reve
als,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁit won™t be the Ancient 
Mysteries.ﬂ  
 
ﬁOf course not,ﬂ he replied. ﬁThe mysteries are 
far too vast to be written on the side of a 
little stone pyramid.ﬂ 
 
The response caught Langdon off guard. ﬁBut if this engraving is 
not
 the Ancient 
Mysteries, then this pyramid is 
not
 the Masonic Pyramid. Legend clearly states the 
Masonic Pyramid was constructed to
 protect the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
The man™s tone was condescending now
. ﬁMr. Langdon, the Masonic Pyramid 
was
 
constructed to preserve the Ancient Mysteries,
 but with a twist you™ve
 apparently not yet 
grasped. Did Peter never tell you? Th
e power of the Masonic Pyramid is 
not
 that it 
reveals the mysteries themselves . . . but
 rather that it reveals the secret 
location
 where 
the mysteries are buried.ﬂ 
 
Langdon did a double take. 
 
ﬁDecipher the engraving,ﬂ the voice conti
nued, ﬁand it will tell you 
the hiding place of 
mankind™s greatest treasure.ﬂ He laughe
d. ﬁPeter did not en
trust you with the 
treasure
 
itself, Professor.ﬂ 
 
Langdon came to an abrupt halt in the tunnel.
 ﬁHold on. You™re saying this pyramid is . . 
. a 
map
? 
 
ﬂ Bellamy jolted to a stop now, too, his expr
ession one of shock and alarm. Clearly, the 
caller had just hit a raw nerve. 
The pyramid is a map.
 
 
ﬁThis map,ﬂ the voice whispered, ﬁor pyramid, or
 portal, or whatever
 you choose to call it 
. . . was created long ago to ensure the hidi
ng place of the Ancient Mysteries would never 
be forgotten . . . that it woul
d never be lost to history.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA grid of sixteen symbols 
doesn™t look much like a map.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAppearances can be deceiving, Professor. But 
regardless, you alone have the power to 
read that inscription.ﬂ  
 
ﬁYou™re wrong,ﬂ Langdon fired back, pi
cturing the simplistic cipher. ﬁ
Anyone
 could 
decipher this engraving. It™s
 not very sophisticated.ﬂ  
 
ﬁI suspect there is more to the pyramid than
 meets the eye. Regardless, you alone possess 
the capstone.ﬂ 
 
Langdon pictured the little capstone in his bag. 
Order from chaos?
 He didn™t know what 
to believe anymore, but the stone pyramid in 
his bag seemed to be getting heavier with 
every passing moment. 
 
Mal™akh pressed the cell phone to his ear, enjoying the sound of Langdon™s anxious 
breathing on the other end. ﬁRight
 now, I have business to atte
nd to, Professor, and so do 
you. Call me as soon as you have deciphered th
e map. We will go together to the hiding 
place and make our trade. Peter™s life . . . for all the wisdom of the ages.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI will do 
nothing
,ﬂ Langdon declared. ﬁEspecially not
 without proof Peter is alive.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI suggest you not test me. You are a very 
small cog in a vast machine. If you disobey 
me, or attempt to find me, Peter 
will
 die. This I swear.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFor all I know, Peter is 
already
 dead.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe is very much alive, Professor, 
but he desperately needs your help.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat are you really looking fo
r?ﬂ Langdon shouted into the phone. 
 
Mal™akh paused before answering. ﬁMany people have pursued the Ancient Mysteries 
and debated their power. Tonight, I w
ill prove the mysteries are real.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was silent. 
 
ﬁI suggest you get to work on the map im
mediately,ﬂ Mal™akh said. ﬁI need this 
information 
today
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁToday?! It™s already after nine o™clock!ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. 
Tempus fugit.
ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 44 
 
 
 
New York
 editor Jonas Faukman was just turning 
off the lights in his Manhattan office 
when his phone rang. He had no intention of 
picking up at this hourŠthat is, until he 
glimpsed the caller-ID display. 
This ought to be good,
 he thought, reaching for the 
receiver. 
 
ﬁDo we still publish you?ﬂ Faukman asked, half serious. 
 
ﬁJonas!ﬂ Robert Langdon™s voice 
sounded anxious. ﬁThank God you™re there. I need your 
help.ﬂ 
 
Faukman™s spirits lifted. ﬁYou™ve got
 pages for me to edit, Robert?ﬂ 
Finally?
 
 
ﬁNo, I need information. Last year, I connect
ed you with a scien
tist named Katherine 
Solomon, the sister of Peter Solomon?ﬂ 
 
Faukman frowned. 
No pages.
 
 
ﬁShe was looking for a publisher for a book on Noetic Science? Do you remember her?ﬂ 
 
Faukman rolled his eyes. ﬁSure. I 
remember. And thanks a million for 
that
 introduction. 
Not only did she refuse to let me read the re
sults of her research, 
she didn™t want to 
publish anything until some magi
cal date in the future.ﬂ 
 
ﬁJonas, listen to me, I don™t have time. I n
eed Katherine™s phone number. Right now. Do 
you have it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ve got to warn you . . . you™re acting a littl
e desperate. She™s gr
eat looking, but you™re 
not going to impress her byŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThis is no joke, Jonas, I need her number now.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAll right . . . hold on.ﬂ Faukman and Langdon 
had been close friends for enough years 
that Faukman knew when Langdon was serious. Jonas typed the name Katherine 
Solomon into a search window and began scanning the company™s e-mail server. 
 
ﬁI™m looking now,ﬂ Faukman said. ﬁAnd for wh
at it™s worth, when you call her, you may 
not want to call from the Harvard Pool
. It sounds like you™re in an asylum.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m not at the pool. I™m in a tunnel under the U.S. Capitol.ﬂ 
 
Faukman sensed from Langdon™s vo
ice that he was not joking. 
What is it with this guy?
 
ﬁRobert, why can™t you just stay home and 
write
?ﬂ His computer pinged. ﬁOkay, hold on 
. . . I got it.ﬂ He moused through the old e-
mail thread. ﬁIt looks lik
e all I have is her 
cell.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll take it.ﬂ 
 
Faukman gave him the number. 
 
ﬁThanks, Jonas,ﬂ Langdon said, sou
nding grateful. ﬁI owe you one.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou 
owe
 me a manuscript, Robert. Do you have any idea how longŠﬂ 
 
The line went dead. 
 
Faukman stared at the receiver and shook hi
s head. Book publishing would be so much 
easier without the authors. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 45 
 
 
 
Katherine Solomon
 did a double take when she saw the name on her caller ID. She had 
imagined the incoming call was from Trish, checking in to explain why she and 
Christopher Abaddon were taking so 
long. But the caller was not Trish. 
 
Far from it. 
 
Katherine felt a blushing smile cross her lips. 
Could tonight get any stranger?
 She 
flipped open her phone. 
 
ﬁDon™t tell me,ﬂ she said playfully. ﬁBookish 
bachelor seeking singl
e Noetic Scientist?ﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine!ﬂ The deep voice belonged 
to Robert Langdon. ﬁThank God you™re okay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course I™m okay,ﬂ she replied, puzzled. ﬁOth
er than the fact th
at you never called me 
after that party at Peter™s house last summer.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSomething has happened tonight. Please li
sten.ﬂ His normally smooth voice sounded 
ragged. ﬁI™m so sorry to have to tell you this
 . . . but Peter is 
in serious trouble.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s smile disappeared. 
ﬁWhat are you talking about?ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter . . .ﬂ Langdon hesitated as
 if searching for words. ﬁI 
don™t know how to say it, but 
he™s been . . . 
taken
. I™m not sure how or by whom, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁTaken?ﬂ Katherine demanded. ﬁRobert, you™re scaring me. Taken . . . where?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTaken captive.ﬂ Langdon™s voice cracked as 
if he were overwhelmed. ﬁIt must have 
happened earlier today or maybe yesterday.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThis isn™t funny,ﬂ she said angrily. ﬁMy brother is 
fine
. I just spoke to him fifteen 
minutes ago!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou did?!ﬂ Langdon sounded stunned. 
 
ﬁYes! He just texted me to say he was coming to the lab.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe 
texted
 you . . .ﬂ Langdon thought out loud. ﬁB
ut you didn™t actually hear his 
voice
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁListen to me. The text you received was 
not
 from your brother. Someone has Peter™s 
phone. He™s dangerous. Whoever it is tricked 
me into coming to Washington tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁTricked you? You™re not making any sense!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know, I™m so sorry.ﬂ Langdon seemed unchar
acteristically disorientated. ﬁKatherine, I 
think you could be in danger.ﬂ 
 
Katherine Solomon was sure that Langdon woul
d never joke about something like this, 
and yet he sounded like he had lost his mind. ﬁI
™m fine,ﬂ she said. ﬁI™m locked inside a 
secure building!ﬂ 
 
ﬁRead me the message you got from Peter™s phone. 
Please
.ﬂ 
 
Bewildered, Katherine pulled up the text messa
ge and read it to Langdon, feeling a chill 
as she came to the final part referencing 
Dr. Abaddon. ﬁ‚If available, have Dr. Abaddon 
join us inside. I trust him fully . . .™ ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh God . . .ﬂ Langdon™s voice was laced with f
ear. ﬁDid you invite this man inside?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes! My assistant just went
 out to the lobby to get him. I expect them back anyŠﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine, get out!ﬂ
 Langdon yelled. ﬁNow!ﬂ 
 
At the other side of the SMSC
, inside the security room, a phone began ringing, drowning 
out the Redskins game. The guard reluctantly
 pulled out his earbuds one more time. 
 
ﬁLobby,ﬂ he answered. ﬁThis is Kyle.ﬂ 
 
ﬁKyle, it™s Katherine Solomon!ﬂ Her voi
ce sounded anxious, out of breath. 
 
ﬁMa™am, your brother has not yetŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere™s Trish?!ﬂ she demanded. ﬁCan you see her on the monitors?ﬂ 
 
The guard rolled his chair over to look at the sc
reens. ﬁShe hasn™t go
tten back to the Cube 
yet?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo!ﬂ Katherine shouted, sounding alarmed. 
 
The guard now realized that Katherine So
lomon was out of breath, as if she were 
running. 
What™s going on back there?
 
 
The guard quickly worked the video joysti
ck, skimming through frames of digital video 
at rapid speed. ﬁOkay, hold on, scrolling thr
ough playback . . . I™ve got Trish with your 
guest leaving the lobby . . . they move down 
the Street . . . fast-forwarding . . . okay, 
they™re going into Wet Pod . . . Trish uses 
her key card to unlock the door . . . both of 
them step into Wet Pod . . . fast-forwarding 
. . . okay, here they are coming out of Wet 
Pod just a minute ago . . . heading down . . .ﬂ
 He cocked his head, slowing the playback. 
ﬁWait a minute. That™s odd.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe gentleman came out of Wet Pod alone.ﬂ 
 
ﬁTrish stayed inside?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, it looks that way. I™m watching your gue
st now . . . he™s in the hall on his own.ﬂ 
 
ﬁ
Where
 is Trish?ﬂ Katherine asked more frantically. 
 
ﬁI don™t see her on the video feed,ﬂ he replied, 
an edge of anxiety cr
eeping into his voice. 
He looked back at the screen and noticed that 
the man™s jacket sleeve
s appeared to be wet 
. . . all the way up to his elbows. 
What in the world di
d he do in Wet Pod?
 The guard 
watched as the man began to move purposef
ully down the main hallway toward Pod 5, 
clutching in his hand what 
looked like . . . a key card. 
 
The guard felt the hair on the back of his 
neck stand on end. ﬁMs. Solomon, we™ve got a 
serious problem.ﬂ 
 
Tonight was a night of firsts for Katherine Solomon. 
 
In two years, she had never used her cell phone inside the void. Nor had she ever crossed 
the void at a dead run. At the moment, howev
er, Katherine had a cel
l phone pressed to 
her ear while she was dashing 
blindly along the endl
ess length of carpet. Each time she 
felt a foot stray from the carpe
t, she corrected back to cen
ter, racing on th
rough the sheer 
darkness. 
 
ﬁWhere is he now?ﬂ Katherin
e asked the guard, breathless. 
 
ﬁChecking now,ﬂ the guard replied. ﬁFast-forw
arding . . . okay, here he is walking down 
the hall . . . moving toward Pod Five . . .ﬂ 
 
Katherine ran harder, hoping to
 reach the exit before she got trapped back here. ﬁHow 
long until he gets to the Pod Five entrance?ﬂ 
 
The guard paused. ﬁMa™am, you don™t understand. I™m still fast-forwarding. This is 
recorded playback. This 
already
 happened.ﬂ He paused. ﬁHold on, let me check the entry 
event monitor.ﬂ He paused and then said, ﬁMa™am, Ms. Dunne™s key card shows a Pod 
Five entry event about a minute ago.ﬂ 
 
Katherine slammed on the brakes, sliding to a 
halt in the middle of th
e abyss. ﬁHe already 
unlocked Pod Five?ﬂ she whispered into the phone. 
 
The guard was typing frantically. ﬁYes, it looks 
like he entered . . . ninety seconds ago.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s body went rigid. She stopped brea
thing. The darkness felt suddenly alive all 
around her. 
 
He™s in here with me.
 
 
In an instant, Katherine realized that the 
only light in the entire space was coming from 
her cell phone, illuminating the side of her f
ace. ﬁSend help,ﬂ she whispered to the guard. 
ﬁAnd get to Wet Pod to help Trish.ﬂ Then 
she quietly closed her phone, extinguishing the 
light. 
 
Absolute darkness settled around her. 
 
She stood stock-still and breathed as quietly 
as possible. After a few seconds, the pungent 
scent of ethanol wafted out of the darkness in
 front of her. The smell got stronger. She 
could sense a presence, only a fe
w feet in front of her on the 
carpet. In the silence, the 
pounding of Katherine™s heart seemed loud e
nough to give her away. Silently, she 
stepped out of her shoes and inched to her 
left, sidestepping off the carpet. The cement 
felt cold under her feet. She took one
 more step to clear the carpet. 
 
One of her toes cracked. 
 
It sounded like a gunshot in the stillness. 
 
Only a few yards away, a rustle of clothing 
suddenly came at her out of the darkness. 
Katherine bolted an instant too late and a 
powerful arm snagged her, groping in the 
darkness, hands violently attempting to gain 
purchase. She spun away
 as a viselike grip 
caught her lab coat, yanking her backward, reeling her in. 
 
Katherine threw her arms backward, slithering out of her lab coat and slipping free. 
Suddenly, with no idea anymore which way 
was out, Katherine Solomon found herself 
dashing, dead blind, across an endless black abyss. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 46 
 
 
 
Despite containing
 what many have called ﬁthe most 
beautiful room in the world,ﬂ the 
Library of Congress is known less for its 
breathtaking splendor than for its vast 
collections. With over five hundred mile
s of shelvesŠenough to stretch from 
Washington, D.C., to BostonŠit eas
ily claims the title of largest library on earth. And yet 
still
 it expands, at a rate of 
over ten thousand items per day. 
 
As an early repository for Thomas Jeffers
on™s personal collection of books on science 
and philosophy, the library stood as a sym
bol of America™s commitment to the 
dissemination of knowledge. One of
 the first buildings in Washington to have electric 
lights, it literally shone like a beac
on in the darkness of the New World. 
 
As its name implies, the Library of Congre
ss was established to serve Congress, whose 
venerated members worked across the street 
in the Capitol Building. This age-old bond 
between library and Capitol ha
d been fortified recently by 
the construction of a physical 
connectionŠa long tunnel beneath Independenc
e Avenue that linked the two buildings. 
 
Tonight, inside this dimly lit tunnel, Robe
rt Langdon followed Warren Bellamy through a 
construction zone, trying to quell his 
own deepening concern for Katherine. 
This lunatic 
is at her lab?!
 Langdon didn™t even want to imagine 
why. When he had called to warn 
her, Langdon had told Katherine exactly 
where to meet him before they hung up. 
How 
much longer is this damned tunnel?
 His head ached now, 
a roiling torrent of 
interconnected thoughts: Katherine, Peter,
 the Masons, Bellamy, pyramids, ancient 
prophecy . . . and a map. 
 
Langdon shook it all off and pressed on. 
Bellamy promised me answers.
 
 
When the two men finally reached the 
end of the passage, Bellamy guided Langdon 
through a set of double doors that were stil
l under construction. Finding no way to lock 
the unfinished doors behind them, Bellamy improvised, grabbing an aluminum ladder 
from the construction supplies a
nd leaning it precariously ag
ainst the outside of the door. 
Then he balanced a metal bucket on top. 
If anyone opened the door, the bucket would 
crash loudly to the floor. 
 
That™s our alarm system?
 Langdon eyed the perched bucket, hoping Bellamy had a more 
comprehensive plan for their safety toni
ght. Everything had happened so fast, and 
Langdon was only now starting to process the re
percussions of his fleeing with Bellamy. 
I™m a fugitive from the CIA.
 
 
Bellamy led the way around a corner, where the two men began ascending a wide 
staircase that was cordoned off with 
orange pylons. Langdon™s daybag weighed him 
down as he climbed. ﬁThe stone pyramid,ﬂ he said, ﬁI still don™t understandŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNot here,ﬂ Bellamy interrupted. ﬁWe™ll exam
ine it in the light. I know a safe place.ﬂ  
 
Langdon doubted such a place existed for anyone 
who had just physically assaulted the 
director of the CIA™s Office of Security. 
 
As the two men reached the top of the stairs
, they entered a wide hallway of Italian 
marble, stucco, and gold leaf. The hall was line
d with eight pairs of 
statuesŠall depicting 
the goddess Minerva. Bellamy pressed on, 
leading Langdon eastward, through a vaulted 
archway, into a far grander space. 
 
Even in the dim, after-hours lighting, the li
brary™s great hall shone with the classical 
grandeur of an opulent European palace. Se
venty-five feet overhead, stained-glass 
skylights glistened between paneled beams a
dorned with rare ﬁaluminum leafﬂŠa metal 
that was considered to be more precious th
an gold at one time. Beneath that, a stately 
course of paired pillars 
lined the second-floor balcony, 
accessible by two magnificent 
curling staircases whose newel posts suppor
ted giant bronze female figures raising 
torches of enlightenment. 
 
In a bizarre attempt to reflect this theme of 
modern enlightenment and yet stay within the 
decorative register of Renai
ssance architecture, the stairw
ay banisters had been carved 
with cupidlike putti portrayed as modern scientists. 
An angelic electrician holding a 
telephone? A cherubic entomol
ogist with a specimen box?
 Langdon wondered what 
Bernini would have thought. 
 
ﬁWe™ll talk over here,ﬂ Bellamy said, leadi
ng Langdon past the bulletp
roof display cases 
that contained the library™s two most valuable booksŠthe Giant Bible of Mainz, 
handwritten in the 1450s, and America™s copy of
 the Gutenberg Bible, one of only three 
perfect vellum copies in the world. Fitt
ingly, the vaulted cei
ling overhead bore John 
White Alexander™s six-panel painting titled 
The Evolution of the Book.
 
 
Bellamy strode directly to a pair of elegan
t double doors at the cente
r rear of the east-
corridor wall. Langdon knew what room lay be
yond those doors, but it seemed a strange 
choice for a conversation. Notwithstanding the 
irony of talking in a space filled with 
ﬁSilence Pleaseﬂ signs, this room hardly seemed like a ﬁsafe place.ﬂ Located dead center 
of the library™s cruciform-shaped floor pla
n, this chamber served as the heart of the 
building. Hiding in here was like breaking in
to a cathedral and hiding on the altar. 
 
Nonetheless, Bellamy unlocked the doors, st
epped into the darkness beyond, and groped 
for the lights. When he flipped the switc
h, one of America™s great architectural 
masterpieces seemed to materialize out of thin air. 
 
The famous reading room was a feast for th
e senses. A voluminous octagon rose 160 feet 
at its center, its eight sides 
finished in chocolate-brown 
Tennessee marble, cream-colored 
Siena marble, and apple-red Algerian marble. Because it was lit from eight angles, no 
shadows fell anywhere, creating the eff
ect that the room itself was glowing. 
 
ﬁSome say it™s the most striking room in Washington,ﬂ Bellamy said, ushering Langdon 
inside. 
 
Maybe in the whole world,
 Langdon thought as he steppe
d across the threshold. As 
always, his gaze first ascended straight up to 
the towering central collar, where rays of 
arabesque coffers curled down the dome to an upper balcony. Encircling the room, 
sixteen bronze ﬁportraitﬂ statues peered down from the balustrade. Beneath them, a 
stunning arcade of archways formed a lower balcony. Down at floor level, three 
concentric circles of burnished wood desk
s radiated out from the massive octagonal 
circulation desk. 
 
Langdon returned his focus to Bellamy, w
ho was now propping the room™s double doors 
wide open. ﬁI thought we were 
hiding
,ﬂ Langdon said, confused. 
 
ﬁIf anyone enters the building,ﬂ Bellamy sa
id, ﬁI want to hear them coming.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut won™t they find us instantly in here?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo matter 
where
 we hide, they™ll find us. But if 
anyone corners us in this building, 
you™ll be very glad I chose this room.ﬂ 
 
Langdon had no idea why, but Bellamy apparently wasn™t looking to discuss it. He was 
already on the move toward the 
center of the room, where he se
lected one of the available 
reading desks, pulled up two chai
rs, and flipped on the readin
g light. Then he motioned to 
Langdon™s bag. 
 
ﬁOkay, Professor, let™s have a closer look.ﬂ 
 
Not wanting to risk scratching its polished surface with a rough piece of granite, Langdon 
hoisted his entire bag onto the desk and unzippe
d it, folding the sides all the way down to 
reveal the pyramid inside. Warren Bellamy ad
justed the reading lamp and studied the 
pyramid carefully. He ran his fi
ngers over the unusual engraving. 
 
ﬁI assume you recognize this language?ﬂ Bellamy asked. 
 
ﬁOf course,ﬂ Langdon replied, eyeing the sixteen symbols. 
 
 
 
Known as the Freemason™s Cipher, this enc
oded language had been used for private 
communication among early Masonic brothe
rs. The encryption method had been 
abandoned long ago for one simple reasonŠit was much too easy to break. Most of the 
students in Langdon™s senior symbology seminar 
could break this code in about five 
minutes. Langdon, with a pencil and paper,
 could do it in under sixty seconds. 
 
The notorious breakability of
 this centuries-old encrypt
ion scheme now presented a 
couple of paradoxes. First, the claim that
 Langdon was the only person on earth who 
could break it was absurd. Second, for Sato to 
suggest that a Masonic cipher was an issue 
of national security was like her suggesting 
our nuclear launch codes 
were encrypted with 
a Cracker Jack decoder ring. Langdon was s
till struggling to believe any of it. 
This 
pyramid is a
 map
? Pointing to the lost wisdom of the ages?
 
 
ﬁRobert,ﬂ Bellamy said, his tone grave. ﬁD
id Director Sato tell you why she is so 
interested in this?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shook his head. ﬁNot specifically. She 
just kept saying it was an issue of 
national security. I assume she™s lying.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPerhaps,ﬂ Bellamy said, rubbing the back of 
his neck. He seemed to be struggling with 
something. ﬁBut there is a far more troubling 
possibility.ﬂ He turn
ed to look Langdon in 
the eye. ﬁIt™s possible that Director Sato ha
s discovered this pyramid™s true potential.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 47 
 
 
 
The blackness
 engulfing Katherine Solomon felt absolute. 
 
Having fled the familiar safety of the carpe
t, she was now groping blindly forward, her 
outstretched hands touching only empty space as 
she staggered deeper into the desolate 
void. Beneath her stockinged feet, the endless 
expanse of cold cement felt like a frozen 
lake . . . a hostile environment from which she now needed to escape. 
 
No longer smelling ethanol, she stopped and wa
ited in darkness. Standing dead still, she 
listened, willing her heart to stop pounding 
so loudly. The heavy footsteps behind her 
seemed to have stopped. 
Did I lose him?
 Katherine closed her eyes and tried to imagine 
where she was. 
Which direction did I run? Where is the door?
 It was no use. She was so 
turned around now that the exit could be anywhere. 
 
Fear, Katherine had once heard, acted as a st
imulant, sharpening the mind™s ability to 
think. Right now, however, her fe
ar had turned her mind into a tumbling torrent of panic 
and confusion. 
Even if I find the exit, I can™t get out.
 Her key card had been lost when 
she™d shed her lab coat. Her only hope seemed
 to be that she was now a needle in a 
haystackŠa single point on a thirty-thousand-
square-foot grid. Despite the overwhelming 
urge to flee, Katherine™s anal
ytical mind told her instead to
 make the only logical moveŠ
no move at all. 
Stay still. Don™t make a sound.
 The security guard was on his way, and for 
some unknown reason, her attacker smelled strongly of ethanol. 
If he gets too close, I™ll 
know it.
 
 
As Katherine stood in silence, her mind raced over what Langdon had said. 
Your brother 
. . . he™s been taken.
 She felt a bead of cold sweat materialize on her arm and trickle 
down, toward the cell phone still clenched in her right 
hand. It was a danger she had 
forgotten to consider. If the phone rang, it w
ould give away her position, and she could 
not turn it off without opening it and illuminating the display. 
 
Set down the phone . . . and move away from it.
 
 
But it was too late. The smell of ethanol 
approached on her right. And now it grew 
stronger. Katherine struggled to 
stay calm, forcing herself to  
override the instinct to run. Carefully, slowl
y, she took one step to her left. The faint 
rustle of her clothing was a
pparently all her attacker n
eeded. She heard him lunge, and 
the smell of ethanol washed over her as a 
powerful hand grabbed at her shoulder. She 
twisted away, raw terror gripping her. Math
ematical probability went out the window, 
and Katherine broke into a blind sprint. She 
veered hard to the left, changing course, 
dashing blindly now into the void. 
 
The wall materialized out of nowhere. 
 
Katherine hit it hard, knocking the wind from 
her lungs. Pain blossomed in her arm and 
shoulder, but she managed to stay on her 
feet. The oblique angle at which she had 
collided with the wall had spared her the full force of the blow, but it was little comfort 
now. The sound had echoed everywhere. 
He knows where I am.
 Doubled over in pain, 
she turned her head and stared out into th
e blackness of the pod and sensed him staring 
back at her. 
 
Change your location. Now!
 
 
Still struggling to catch her breath, she be
gan moving down the wall, touching her left 
hand quietly to each exposed steel stud as she passed. 
Stay along the wall. Slip past him 
before he corners you.
 In her right hand, Katherine sti
ll clutched her cell phone, ready to 
hurl it as a projectile if need be. 
 
Katherine was in no way prepared for the 
sound she heard nextŠthe clear rustle of 
clothing directly in 
front
 of her . . . against the wall. Sh
e froze, stock-still, and stopped 
breathing. 
How could he be on the wall already?
 She felt a faint puff of air, laced with 
the stench of ethanol. 
He™s moving down the wall toward me!
 
 
Katherine backed up several steps. Then, tu
rning silently 180 degrees, she began moving 
quickly in the opposite directi
on down the wall. She moved twenty feet or so when the 
impossible happened. Once again, directly in fr
ont of her, along th
e wall, she heard the 
rustling sound of clothing. Then came the sa
me puff of air and the smell of ethanol. 
Katherine Solomon froze in place. 
 
My God, he™s everywhere!
 
 
Bare-chested, Mal™akh star
ed into the darkness. 
 
The smell of ethanol on his sleeves had prove
n a liability, and so he had transformed it 
into an asset, stripping off his shirt and jack
et and using them to 
help corner his prey. 
Throwing his jacket against the wall to the 
right, he had heard Katherine stop short and 
change direction. Now, having thrown his shirt ahead to the left, Mal™akh had heard her 
stop again. He had effectively corralled Kath
erine against the wall by establishing points 
beyond which she dared not pass. 
 
Now he waited, ears straining in the silence. 
She has only one direction she can moveŠ
directly toward me.
 Even so, Mal™akh heard nothing. 
Either Katherine was paralyzed 
with fear, or she had decided to stand 
still and wait for help to enter Pod 5. 
Either way 
she loses.
 Nobody would be entering Pod 5 anytime soon; Mal™akh had disabled the outer 
keypad with a very crude, yet 
very effective, technique. Afte
r using Trish™s key card, he 
had rammed a single dime deep into the key-
card slot to prevent any other key-card use 
without first dismantling the entire mechanism. 
 
You and I are alone, Katherine . . 
. for as long as this takes.
 
 
Mal™akh inched silently forward, listening 
for any movement. Katherine Solomon would 
die tonight in the darkness of her brot
her™s museum. A poetic end. Mal™akh looked 
forward to sharing the news of Katherine™s de
ath with her brother. The old man™s anguish 
would be long-awaited revenge. 
 
Suddenly in the darkness, to Mal™akh™s great su
rprise, he saw a tiny glow in the distance 
and realized Katherine had just made a deadly error in judgment. 
She™s phoning for 
help?!
 The electronic display that had just flickered to life was hove
ring waist high, about 
twenty yards ahead, like a shining beacon on 
a vast ocean of black. Mal™akh had been 
prepared to wait Katherine out, 
but now he wouldn™t have to. 
 
Mal™akh sprang into motion, racing toward th
e hovering light, knowing he had to reach 
her before she could complete her call for he
lp. He was there in a matter of seconds, and 
he lunged, arms outstretched on either side 
of her glowing cell phone
, preparing to engulf 
her. 
 
Mal™akh™s fingers jammed into a solid wall, 
bending backward and almost breaking. His 
head collided next, crashing into a steel beam. He cried out in pain as he crumpled beside 
the wall. Cursing, he clambered back to his feet, pulling himself up by the waist-high, 
horizontal strut on which Katherine Solomon 
had cleverly placed
 her open cell phone. 
 
Katherine was running again, this time with
 no concern for the noise her hand was 
making as it bounced rhythmically off the evenly spaced metal studs of Pod 5. 
Run!
 If 
she followed the wall all the way around the pod, 
she knew that sooner 
or later she would 
feel the exit door. 
 
Where the hell is the guard?
 
 
The even spacing of the studs c
ontinued as she ran with her 
left hand on the sidewall and 
her right out in front of her for protection. 
When will I reach the corner?
 The sidewall 
seemed to go on and on, but suddenly the rhythm
 of the studs was broken. Her left hand 
hit empty space for several long strides, and then the studs began again. Katherine 
slammed on the brakes and b
acked up, feeling her way across the smooth metal panel. 
Why are there no studs here?
 
 
She could hear her attacker lumbering l
oudly after her now, groping his way down the 
wall in her direction. Even so, it was a differe
nt sound that scared Katherine even moreŠ
the distant rhythmic banging of a security 
guard pounding his flashlight against the Pod 5 
door. 
 
The guard can™t get in?
 
 
While the thought was terrifying, the 
location
 of his bangingŠdiagonally to her rightŠ
instantly oriented Katherine. She could now 
picture where in Pod 5 she was located. The 
visual flash brought with it an
 unexpected realization. She no
w knew what this flat panel 
on the wall was. 
 
Every pod was equipped with a specimen ba
yŠa giant movable wall that could be 
retracted for transporting oversize specimens in and out of the pods. Like those of an 
airplane hangar, this door was mammoth, and 
Katherine in her wildest dreams had never 
imagined needing to open it. At the mo
ment, though, it seemed like her only hope. 
 
Is it even operable?
 
 
Katherine fumbled blindly in the blackness,
 searching the bay door until she found the 
large metal handle. Grasping it, she threw her 
weight backward, tryi
ng to slide open the 
door. Nothing. She tried again. It didn™t budge. 
 
She could hear her attacker closing faster 
now, homing in on the sounds of her efforts. 
The bay door is locked!
 Wild with panic, she slid her 
hands all over the door, feeling the 
surface for any latch or lever. She suddenly hi
t what felt like a vertical pole. She followed 
it down to the floor, crouching, and could feel it
 was inserted into a hole in the cement. 
A 
security rod!
 She stood up, grabbed the pole, and, lifting 
with her legs, slid the rod up and 
out of the hole. 
 
He™s almost here!
 
 
Katherine groped now for the handle, found it ag
ain, and heaved back on it with all her 
might. The massive panel seemed barely to 
move, and yet a sliver of moonlight now 
sliced into Pod 5. Katherine pulled again. Th
e shaft of light from outside the building 
grew wider. A 
little more!
 She pulled one last time, sensing her attacker was now only a 
few feet away. 
 
Leaping toward the light, Katherine wriggled
 her slender body sideways into the opening. 
A hand materialized in the dar
kness, clawing at her, trying 
to pull her back inside. She 
heaved herself through the opening, pursued by a 
massive bare arm that was covered with 
tattooed scales. The terrifying arm writhed 
like an angry snake trying to seize her. 
 
Katherine spun and fled down the long, pale out
er wall of Pod 5. The bed of loose stones 
that surrounded the entir
e perimeter of the SMSC cut into her stockinged feet as she ran, 
but she pressed on, heading for the main entran
ce. The night was dark, but with her eyes 
fully dilated from the utter blackness of P
od 5, she could see perfec
tlyŠalmost as if it 
were daylight. Behind her, the heavy 
bay door ground open, and she heard heavy 
footsteps accelerating in pursuit down the side
 of the building. The footsteps seemed 
impossibly fast. 
 
I™ll never outrun him to
 the main entrance.
 She knew her Volvo was closer, but even that 
would be too far. 
I™m not going to make it.
 
 
Then Katherine realized she 
had one final card to play. 
 
As she neared the corner of Pod 5, she could 
hear his footsteps quick
ly overtaking her in 
the darkness. 
Now or never.
 Instead of rounding the corner, Katherine suddenly cut hard 
to her left, 
away
 from the building, out onto the grass. 
As she did so, she closed her eyes 
tightly, placed both hands over her face, and 
began running totally blind across the lawn. 
 
The motion-activated security lighting that 
blazed to life around Pod 5 transformed night 
into day instantly. Katherine he
ard a scream of pain behind he
r as the brilliant floodlights 
seared into her assailant™s 
hyper dilated pupils with over tw
enty-five-million candlepower 
of light. She could hear him 
stumbling on the loose stones. 
 
Katherine kept her eyes tightly closed, 
trusting herself on the open lawn. When she 
sensed she was far enough away from the build
ing and the lights, she opened her eyes, 
corrected her course, and ra
n like hell through the dark. 
 
Her Volvo™s keys were exactly where she always left them, in the center console. 
Breathless, she seized the keys in her trem
bling hands and found the ignition. The engine 
roared to life, and her headlights flip
ped on, illuminating a terrifying sight. 
 
A hideous form raced toward her. 
 
Katherine froze for an instant. 
 
The creature caught in her headlights was a 
bald and bare-chested animal, its skin 
covered with tattooed scales, symbols, and te
xt. He bellowed as he ran into the glare, 
raising his hands before his eyes like a cave-
dwelling beast seeing sunlight for the first 
time. She reached for the gearshift but sudde
nly he was there, hurling his elbow through 
her side window, sending a shower 
of safety glass into her lap. 
 
A massive scale-covered arm 
burst through her window, groping half blind, finding her 
neck. She threw the car in reverse, but her a
ttacker had latched on to her throat, squeezing 
with unimaginable force. She turned her h
ead in an attempt to escape his grasp, and 
suddenly she was staring at his face. Three dark 
stripes, like fingernail scratches, had torn 
through his face makeup to reveal the tattoos beneath. His eyes were wild and ruthless. 
 
ﬁI should have killed you ten years ago,ﬂ he
 growled. ﬁThe night I 
killed your mother.ﬂ 
 
As his words registered, Katherine was seized
 by a horrifying memory: that feral look in 
his eyesŠshe had seen it before. 
It™s him.
 She would have screamed had it not been for 
the viselike grip around her neck. 
 
She smashed her foot onto the accelerator
, and the car lurched backward, almost 
snapping her neck as he was dragged beside 
her car. The Volvo careened up an inclined 
median, and Katherine could feel her neck
 about to give way 
beneath his weight. 
Suddenly tree branches were scraping the si
de of her car, slapping through the side 
windows, and the weight was gone. 
 
The car burst through the evergreens and out in
to the upper parking lot, where Katherine 
slammed on the brakes. Below her, the half-nak
ed man clambered to hi
s feet, staring into 
her headlights. With a terrifying calm, he
 raised a menacing scale-covered arm and 
pointed directly at her. 
 
Katherine™s blood coursed with ra
w fear and hatred as she sp
un the wheel and hit the gas. 
Seconds later, she was fishtai
ling out onto Silver Hill Road. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 48 
 
 
 
In the
 heat of the moment, Capitol police offi
cer Nuñez had seen no 
option but to help 
the Capitol Architect and R
obert Langdon escape. Now, however, back in the basement 
police headquarters, Nuñez could see the storm clouds gathering fast. 
 
Chief Trent Anderson was holding an ice pack
 to his head while another officer was 
tending to Sato™s bruises. Both of them were
 standing with the vide
o surveillance team, 
reviewing digital playback files in an
 attempt to locate Langdon and Bellamy. 
 
ﬁCheck the playback on every hallway and exit
,ﬂ Sato demanded. ﬁI want to know where 
they went!ﬂ 
 
Nuñez felt ill as he looked on. He knew it woul
d be only a matter of minutes before they 
found the right video clip and learned the truth. 
I helped them escape.
 Making matters 
worse was the arrival of a four-man CIA 
field team that was now staging nearby, 
prepping to go after Langdon and Bellamy. Th
ese guys looked nothing like the Capitol 
Police. These guys were dead-serious sold
iers . . . black camouflage, night vision, 
futuristic-looking handguns. 
 
Nuñez felt like he would throw up. Making up 
his mind, he motioned discreetly to Chief 
Anderson. ﬁA word, Chief?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat is it?ﬂ Anderson follo
wed Nuñez into the hall. 
 
ﬁChief, I made a bad mistake,ﬂ Nuñez sa
id, breaking a sweat. ﬁI™m sorry, and I™m 
resigning.ﬂ 
You™ll fire me in a few minutes anyway.
 
 
ﬁI beg your pardon?ﬂ 
 
Nuñez swallowed hard. ﬁEarlier, I saw La
ngdon and Architect Bellamy in the visitor 
center on their way out
 of the building.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat?!ﬂ Anderson bellowed. ﬁWhy didn™t you say something?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Architect told me
 not to say a word.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou work for 
me,
 goddamm it!ﬂ Anderson™s voice echoed 
down the corridor. ﬁBellamy 
smashed my head into a wall, for Christ™s sake!ﬂ 
 
Nuñez handed Anderson the key that the Architect had given him. 
 
ﬁWhat is this?ﬂ Anderson demanded. 
 
ﬁA key to the new tunnel under Independence 
Avenue. Architect Bell
amy had it. That™s 
how they escaped.ﬂ 
 
Anderson stared down at the key, speechless. 
 
Sato poked her head out into the hallwa
y, eyes probing. ﬁWhat™s going on out here?ﬂ 
 
Nuñez felt himself go pale. Anderson was still 
holding the key, and Sato clearly had seen 
it. As the hideous little woman drew near, 
Nuñez improvised as best as he could, hoping 
to protect his chief. ﬁI found a key on the 
floor in the subbasement. I was just asking 
Chief Anderson if he knew what it might go to.ﬂ 
 
Sato arrived, eyeing the ke
y. ﬁAnd does the chief know?ﬂ 
 
Nuñez glanced up at Anderson, who was cl
early weighing all hi
s options before 
speaking. Finally, the chief shook his head. ﬁNot offhand. I™d have to check theŠﬂ 
 
ﬁDon™t bother,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁThis key unl
ocks a tunnel off th
e visitor center.ﬂ 
 
ﬁReally?ﬂ Anderson said. ﬁHow do you know that?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe just found the surveillance clip. Offi
cer Nuñez here helped Langdon and Bellamy 
escape and then relocked that tunnel door be
hind them. Bellamy gave Nuñez that key.ﬂ 
 
Anderson turned to Nuñez with a fl
are of anger. ﬁIs this true?!ﬂ 
 
Nuñez nodded vigorously, doing his best to play 
along. ﬁI™m sorry, sir. The Architect told 
me not to tell a soul!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t give a damn 
what
 the Architect told you!ﬂ A
nderson yelled. ﬁI expectŠﬂ 
 
ﬁShut up, Trent,ﬂ Sato snapped. ﬁYou™re 
both lousy liars. Save it for your CIA 
inquisition.ﬂ She snatched the Architect™s
 tunnel key from Anderson. ﬁYou™re done 
here.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 49 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 hung up his cell phone, feeli
ng increasingly worried. 
Katherine™s not 
answering her cell?
 Katherine had promised to call him as soon as she was safely out of 
the lab and on her way to meet him 
here, but she had never done so. 
 
Bellamy sat beside Langdon at the reading-room
 desk. He, too, had just made a call, his 
to an individual he claimed could offe
r them sanctuaryŠa safe place to hide. 
Unfortunately, this person was not answering 
either, and so Bellamy had left an urgent 
message, telling him to call 
Langdon™s cell phone right away. 
 
ﬁI™ll keep trying,ﬂ he said to Langdon, ﬁbut
 for the moment, we™re on our own. And we 
need to discuss a plan for this pyramid.ﬂ 
 
The pyramid.
 For Langdon, the spectacular backdrop 
of the reading room had all but 
disappeared, his world constricting now to in
clude only what was di
rectly in front of 
himŠa stone pyramid, a sealed package containing a capstone, and an elegant African 
American man who had materialized out of
 the darkness and rescued him from the 
certainty of a CIA interrogation. 
 
Langdon had expected a modicum of sanity from
 the Architect of the Capitol, but now it 
seemed Warren Bellamy was no more rational than the madman claiming Peter was in 
purgatory. Bellamy was insisting this stone pyr
amid was, in fact, the Masonic Pyramid of 
legend. 
An ancient map? That guides us to powerful wisdom?
 
 
ﬁMr. Bellamy,ﬂ Langdon said politely, ﬁthis idea 
that there exists so
me kind of ancient 
knowledge that can imbue men with great power 
. . . I simply can™t take it seriously.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy™s eyes looked both disappointed a
nd earnest, making Langdon™s skepticism all 
the more awkward. ﬁYes, Professor, I had 
imagined you might feel this way, but I 
suppose I should not be surprised. You are an 
outsider looking in. There exist certain 
Masonic realities that you w
ill perceive as myth because you are not properly initiated 
and prepared to understand them.ﬂ 
 
Now Langdon felt patronized. 
I wasn™t a member of Odysseus™s crew, but I™m certain the 
Cyclops is a myth.
 ﬁMr. Bellamy, even if the legend is true . . . 
this
 pyramid cannot 
possibly be the Masonic Pyramid.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo?ﬂ Bellamy ran a finger across the Masonic 
cipher on the stone. ﬁIt looks to me like it 
fits the description perfectly. A stone pyram
id with a shining metal capstone, which, 
according to Sato™s X-ray, is exactly what Pe
ter entrusted to you.ﬂ Bellamy picked up the 
little cube-shaped package, weighing it in his hand. 
 
ﬁThis stone pyramid is less than a foot ta
ll,ﬂ Langdon countered. ﬁEvery version of the 
story I™ve ever heard describes th
e Masonic Pyramid as enormous.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy had clearly anticipated this point. 
ﬁAs you know, the legend speaks of a pyramid 
rising so high that God Himsel
f can reach out and touch it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can see your dilemma, Professor. Howe
ver, both the Ancient Mysteries and Masonic 
philosophy celebrate the potentiality of God 
within each of us. Symbolically speaking, 
one could claim that anything within reach of 
an enlightened man . . . is within reach of 
God.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt unswayed by the wordplay. 
 
ﬁEven the Bible concurs,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁIf 
we accept, as Genesis tells us, that ‚God 
created man in his own image,™ then we 
also
 must accept what this impliesŠthat 
mankind was not created 
inferior
 to God. In Luke 17:20 we are told, ‚The kingdom of 
God is within you.™ ﬂ  
 
ﬁI™m sorry, but I don™t know any Christ
ians who consider themselves God™s 
equal
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course not,ﬂ Bellamy said, his tone harden
ing. ﬁBecause most Christians want it both 
ways. They want to be able to proudly decl
are they are believers in the Bible and yet 
simply ignore those parts they find too di
fficult or too inconvenient to believe.ﬂ 
 
Langdon made no response. 
 
ﬁAnyhow,ﬂ Bellamy said, ﬁthe Masonic Pyrami
d™s age-old descrip
tion as being tall 
enough to be touched by God . . . this has l
ong led to misinterpreta
tions about its size. 
Conveniently, it keeps academics like yourself insisting the pyramid is a legend, and 
nobody searches for it.ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked down at the stone pyramid. ﬁI
 apologize that I™m frustrating you,ﬂ he 
said. ﬁI™ve simply always thought of
 the Masonic Pyramid as a myth.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDoes it not seem perfectly f
itting to you that a map created by stonemasons would be 
carved in stone? Throughout hi
story, our most important gui
deposts have always been 
carved in stoneŠincluding the tablets God 
gave MosesŠTen Commandments to guide 
our human conduct.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI understand, and yet it is 
always referred to as the 
Legend
 of the Masonic Pyramid. 
Legend
 implies it is mythical.ﬂ  
 
ﬁYes, 
legend
.ﬂ Bellamy chuckled. ﬁI™m afraid you™re suffering from the same problem 
Moses had.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy looked almost amused as he turned 
in his seat, glancing 
up at the second-tier 
balcony, where sixteen bronze statues peer
ed down at them. ﬁDo you see Moses?ﬂ 
 
Langdon gazed up at the library™s celeb
rated statue of Moses. ﬁYes.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe has horns.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m aware of that.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut do you know 
why
 he has horns?ﬂ 
 
Like most teachers, Langdon did not enjoy be
ing lectured to. The Moses above them had 
horns for the same reason 
thousands
 of Christian images of Moses had hornsŠa 
mistranslation of the book of Exodus. The or
iginal Hebrew text 
described Moses as 
having 
ﬁkaran ™ohr panavﬂ
Šﬁfacial skin that glowed with
 rays of lightﬂŠbut when the 
Roman Catholic Church created 
the official Latin translation of the Bible, the translator 
bungled Moses™s description, rendering it as 
ﬁcornuta esset facies sua,ﬂ
 meaning ﬁhis 
face was horned.ﬂ From that moment on, artists 
and sculptors, fearing reprisals if they 
were not true to the Gospels, be
gan depicting Moses with horns. 
 
ﬁIt was a simple mistake,ﬂ Langdon replie
d. ﬁA mistranslation by Saint Jerome around 
four hundred A.D.ﬂ Bellamy looked impre
ssed. ﬁExactly. A mistranslation. And the 
result is . . . poor Moses is 
now misshapen for all history.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMisshapenﬂ was a nice way to put it. Langdon, 
as a child, had been terrified when he 
saw Michelangelo™s diabolical ﬁhorned MosesﬂŠthe centerpiece of Rome™s Basilica of 
St. Peter in Chains. 
 
ﬁI mention the horned Moses,ﬂ Bellamy now 
said, ﬁto illustrate how a single word, 
misunderstood, can rewrite history.ﬂ 
 
You™re preaching to the choir,
 Langdon thought, having learne
d the lesson firsthand in 
Paris a number of years back. 
SanGreal: Holy Grail. SangReal: Royal Blood.
 
 
ﬁIn the case of the Masonic Pyramid,ﬂ Bellamy
 continued, ﬁpeople heard whispers about 
a ‚legend.™ And the idea stuck. The 
Legend
 of the Masonic Pyramid sounded like a myth. 
But the word 
legend
 was referring to something else
. It had been misconstrued. Much 
like the word 
talisman.
ﬂ He smiled. ﬁLanguage can be very
 adept at hiding the truth.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s true, but you™re losing me here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRobert, the Masonic Pyramid is a 
map
. And like every map, it has a 
legend
Ša key that 
tells you how to read it.ﬂ Bellamy took th
e cube-shaped package 
and held it up. ﬁDon™t 
you see? This capstone 
is
 the legend to the pyramid. It is
 the key that tells you how to 
read the most powerful artifact on earth . 
. . a map that unveils the hiding place of 
mankind™s greatest treasureŠthe 
lost wisdom of the ages.ﬂ 
 
Langdon fell silent. 
 
ﬁI humbly submit,ﬂ Bellamy said, ﬁthat your towering Masonic Pyramid is only 
this
 . . . a 
modest stone whose golden capstone reaches high enough to be touched by God. High 
enough that an enlightened man can reach down and touch it.ﬂ 
 
Silence hung between the tw
o men for several seconds. 
 
Langdon felt an unexpected pulse of exciteme
nt as he looked down at the pyramid, 
seeing it in a new light. His eyes
 moved again to the Masonic ci
pher. ﬁBut this code . . . it 
seems so . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁSimple?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁAlmost 
anyone
 could decipher this.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy smiled and retrieved a pencil and paper for Langdon. ﬁThen perhaps you should 
enlighten us?ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt uneasy about reading the code, a
nd yet considering the circumstances, it 
seemed a minor betrayal of Peter™s trust. 
Moreover, whatever the engraving said, he 
could not imagine that it unveile
d a secret hiding place of anyt
hing at all . . . much less 
that of one of history™s greatest treasures. 
 
Langdon accepted the pencil from Bellamy and 
tapped it on his chin as he studied the 
cipher. The code was so simple that he bare
ly needed pencil and paper. Even so, he 
wanted to ensure he made no mistakes, and so
 he dutifully put penc
il to paper and wrote 
down the most common decryption key for a Ma
sonic cipher. The key consisted of four 
gridsŠtwo plain and two dotte
dŠwith the alphabet running through them in order. Each 
letter of the alphabet was now positioned inside
 a uniquely shaped ﬁen
closureﬂ or ﬁpen.ﬂ 
The shape of each letter™s 
enclosure
 became the 
symbol
 for that letter. 
 
The scheme was so simple, it was almost infantile. 
 
 
 
 
 
Langdon double-checked his handiwork. Feeli
ng confident the decryption key was 
correct, he now turned his attention back 
to the code inscribed on the pyramid. To 
decipher it, all he had to do was to find th
e matching shape on his decryption key and 
write down the letter inside it. 
 
 
 
The first character on the pyramid looked 
like a down arrow or a chalice. Langdon 
quickly found the chalice-shaped segment on 
the decryption key. It was located in the 
lower left-hand corner 
and enclosed the letter 
S
. 
 
Langdon wrote down 
S
. 
 
The next symbol on the pyramid was a dotted sq
uare missing its right side. That shape on 
the decryption grid enclosed the letter 
O
. 
 
He wrote down 
O
. 
 
The third symbol was a simple s
quare, which enclosed the letter 
E
. 
 
Langdon wrote down 
E
. 
 
S O E . . .
 
 
He continued, picking up speed until
 he had completed the entire grid. 
 
Now, as he gazed down at his finished translation, Langdon let out a puzzled sigh. 
Hardly 
what I™d call a eureka moment.
 
 
Bellamy™s face showed the hint of a sm
ile. ﬁAs you know, Professor, the Ancient 
Mysteries are reserved only for the truly enlightened.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRight,ﬂ Langdon said, frowning. 
Apparently, I don™t qualify.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 50 
 
 
 
In a basement
 office deep inside CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, the same 
sixteen-character Masonic cipher glowed bri
ghtly on a high-definiti
on computer monitor. 
Senior OS analyst Nola Kaye sat alone and 
studied the image that had been e-mailed to 
her ten minutes ago by her boss, Director Inoue Sato. 
 
Is this some kind of joke?
 Nola knew it was not, of course; 
Director Sato had no sense of 
humor, and the events of tonight were a
nything but a joking matter. Nola™s high-level 
clearance within the CIA™s al
l-seeing Office of Security ha
d opened her eyes to the 
shadow worlds of power. But what Nola had 
witnessed in the last
 twenty-four hours had 
changed her impressions forever of 
the secrets that powerful men kept. 
 
ﬁYes, Director,ﬂ Nola now said, cradling the 
phone on her shoulder as she talked to Sato. 
ﬁThe engraving is indeed the 
Masonic cipher. However, the cl
eartext is meaningless. It 
appears to be a grid of random letters
.ﬂ She gazed down at her decryption. 
 
 
 
ﬁIt must say 
something,
ﬂ Sato insisted. 
 
ﬁNot unless it has a second layer of 
encryption that I™m not aware of.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAny guesses?ﬂ Sato asked. 
 
ﬁIt™s a grid-based matrix, so I could run the usualŠVigenère, grilles, trellises, and so 
forthŠbut no promises, especia
lly if it™s a onetime pad.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo what you can. And do it fast. How about the X-ray?ﬂ 
 
Nola swiveled her chair to a second 
system, which displayed a standard  
security X-ray of someone™s bag. Sato had re
quested information on what appeared to be 
a small pyramid inside a cube-shaped box. Norm
ally, a two-inch-tall 
object would not be 
an issue of national security 
unless it was made of enriched
 plutonium. This one was not. 
It was made of something almost equally startling. 
 
ﬁImage-density analysis was conclusive,ﬂ 
Nola said. ﬁNineteen-point-three grams per 
cubic centimeter. It™s pure 
gold. Very, very valuable.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnything else?ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, yes. The density scan picked up mi
nor irregularities on th
e surface of the gold 
pyramid. It turns out the gold 
is engraved with text.ﬂ 
 
ﬁReally?ﬂ Sato sounded hopefu
l. ﬁWhat does it say?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can™t tell yet. The inscription is extremely faint. I™m trying to enhance with filters, but 
the resolution on the X-ray is not great.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay, keep trying. Call me when you have something.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd, Nola?ﬂ Sato™s tone turned ominous. ﬁAs with everything you have learned in the 
last twenty-four hours, the im
ages of the stone pyramid a
nd gold capstone are classified 
at the highest levels of security. You are to
 consult no one. You repor
t to me directly. I 
want to make sure that is clear.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁGood. Keep me posted.ﬂ Sato hung up. 
 
Nola rubbed her eyes and looked blearily back 
at her computer screens. She had not slept 
in over thirty-six hours, and she knew damn 
well she would not sl
eep again until this 
crisis had reached its conclusion. 
 
Whatever that may be.
 
 
Back at the Capitol Visitor Center, four bl
ack-clad CIA field-op specialists stood at the 
entrance to the tunnel, peering hungrily down 
the dimly lit shaft like a pack of dogs eager 
for the hunt. 
 
Sato approached, having just hung up from a call. ﬁGentlemen,ﬂ she said, still holding the 
Architect™s key, ﬁare your 
mission parameters clear?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAffirmative,ﬂ the lead agent replied. ﬁWe have 
two
 targets. The first is an engraved 
stone pyramid, approximately 
one foot tall. The second is
 a smaller, cube-shaped 
package, approximately two inches tall. 
Both were last seen in Robert Langdon™s 
shoulder bag.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCorrect,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁThese two items must 
be retrieved quickly and intact. Do you have 
any questions?ﬂ 
 
ﬁParameters for use of force?ﬂ 
 
Sato™s shoulder was still throbbing from wher
e Bellamy had struck her with a bone. ﬁAs I 
said, it is of critical importanc
e that these items be retrieved.ﬂ 
 
ﬁUnderstood.ﬂ The four men turned and headed into the darkness of the tunnel. 
 
Sato lit a cigarette and watched them disappear. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 51 
 
 
 
Katherine Solomon
 had always been a prudent dr
iver, but now she was pushing her 
Volvo at over ninety as she fled blindly 
up the Suitland Parkway. Her trembling foot had 
been lodged on the accelerator for a full mile
 before her panic began to lift. She now 
realized her uncontrollabl
e shivering was no longer solely from fear. 
 
I™m freezing.
 
 
The wintry night air was gushing through he
r shattered window, buffeting her body like 
an arctic wind. Her stockinged feet were num
b, and she reached down for her spare pair 
of shoes, which she kept beneath the passenge
r seat. As she did, she 
felt a stab of pain 
from the bruise on her throat, where the 
powerful hand had latched on to her neck. 
 
The man who had smashed through her window 
bore no resemblance to the blond-haired 
gentleman whom Katherine knew as Dr
. Christopher Abaddon. His thick hair and 
smooth, tanned complexion had disappeared. His shaved head, bare chest, and makeup-
smeared face had been unveiled as 
a terrifying tapest
ry of tattoos. 
 
She heard his voice again, whispering to he
r in the howl of wind outside her broken 
window. 
Katherine, I should have kille
d you years ago . . . the night
 I killed your mother.
 
 
Katherine shivered, feeling no doubt. 
That was him.
 She had never forgotten the look of 
fiendish violence in his eyes. Nor had she ever
 forgotten the sound of 
her brother™s single 
gunshot, which had killed this man, propelling hi
m off a high ledge into the frozen river 
below, where he plummeted through the ic
e and never resurfaced. Investigators had 
searched for weeks, never finding his body, and finally decided it had been washed away 
by the current out to the Chesapeake Bay. 
 
They were wrong,
 she now knew. 
He is still alive.
 
 
And he™s back.
 
 
Katherine felt angst-ridden as the memories flooded back. It was almost exactly ten years 
ago. Christmas Day. Katherine, Peter, a
nd their motherŠher entire familyŠwere 
gathered at their sprawling stone mansion 
in Potomac, nestled on a two-hundred-acre 
wooded estate with its own 
river running through it. 
 
As was tradition, their mother worked diligen
tly in the kitchen, rejoicing in the holiday 
custom of cooking for her two children. Even
 at seventy-five years of age, Isabel 
Solomon was an exuberant cook, and tonight th
e mouthwatering smells of roast venison, 
parsnip gravy, and garlic mashed potatoe
s wafted through the house. While Mother 
prepared the feast, Katherine and her brot
her relaxed in the c
onservatory, discussing 
Katherine™s latest fascinati
onŠa new field called Noetic Sc
ience. An unlikely fusion of 
modern particle physics and 
ancient mysticism, Noetics had absolutely captivated 
Katherine™s imagination. 
 
Physics meets philosophy.
 
 
Katherine told Peter about some of the e
xperiments she was dreaming up, and she could 
see in his eyes that he was intrigued. Kath
erine felt particularly 
pleased to give her 
brother something positive to think about th
is Christmas, since the holiday had also 
become a painful reminder of a terrible tragedy. 
 
Peter™s son, Zachary.
 
 
Katherine™s nephew™s twenty-first birthday 
had been his last. The family had been 
through a nightmare, and it seemed that her br
other was only now finally learning how to 
laugh again. 
 
Zachary had been a late bloomer, frail and 
awkward, a rebellious and angry teenager. 
Despite his deeply loving and privilege
d upbringing, the boy seemed determined to 
detach himself from the Solomon ﬁestablish
ment.ﬂ He was kicked out of prep school, 
partied hard with the ﬁcelebra
ti,ﬂ and shunned his parents™ ex
haustive attempts to provide 
him firm and loving guidance. 
 
He broke Peter™s heart
. 
 
Shortly before Zachary™s eight
eenth birthday, Katherine had sat down with her mother 
and brother and listened to them debati
ng whether or not to
 withhold Zachary™s 
inheritance until he was more mature. The Solomon inheritanceŠa centuries-old 
tradition in the familyŠbequeathed a staggering
ly generous piece of the Solomon wealth 
to every Solomon child on his 
or her eighteenth birthday. Th
e Solomons believed that an 
inheritance was more helpful at the 
beginning
 of someone™s life than at the end. 
Moreover, placing large pieces of the Solo
mon fortune in the hands of eager young 
descendants had been the key to gr
owing the family™s dynastic wealth. 
 
In this case, however, Katherine™s mother ar
gued that it was dangerous to give Peter™s 
troubled son such a large sum of money. Peter disagreed. 
 
ﬁThe Solomon inheritance,ﬂ her brother had sa
id, ﬁis a family tradition that should not be 
broken. This money may well force Zachary to be more responsible.ﬂ 
 
Sadly, her brother had been wrong. 
 
The moment Zachary received the money, he 
broke from the family, disappearing from 
the house without taking any of his belongings
. He surfaced a few m
onths later in the 
tabloids: 
TRUST FUND PLAYBOY LIVI
NG EUROPEAN HIGH LIFE
. 
 
The tabloids took joy in documenting Zachary™
s spoiled life of deba
uchery. The photos of 
wild parties on yachts and drunken disco stupors were hard for the Solomons to take, but 
the photos of their wayward teen turned from
 tragic to frightening when the papers 
reported Zachary had been caught carrying co
caine across a border in Eastern Europe: 
SOLOMON MILLIONAIRE IN TURKISH PRISON
. 
 
The prison, they learned, was called Soganli
kŠa brutal F-class de
tention cente
r located 
in the Kartal district outside 
of Istanbul. Peter Solomon, fearing for his son™s safety, flew 
to Turkey to retrieve him. Katherine™s di
straught brother returned
 empty-handed, having 
been forbidden even to visit with Zachary. The only promising news was that Solomon™s 
influential contacts at the U.S. State Depart
ment were working on getting him extradited 
as quickly as possible. 
 
Two days later, however, Peter received a 
horrifying international phone call. The next 
morning, headlines blared: 
SOLOMON HEIR MURDERED IN PRISON
. 
 
The prison photos were horrific, and the medi
a callously aired them all, even long after 
the Solomons™ private burial ceremony. Peter™
s wife never forgave him for failing to free 
Zachary, and their marriage came to an end six 
months later. Peter had been alone ever 
since. 
 
It was years later that Katherine, Peter, and 
their mother, Isabel, were gathered quietly for 
Christmas. The pain was still a presence in th
eir family, but mercifully it was fading with 
each passing year. The pleasant 
rattle of pots and pans now echoed from the kitchen as 
their mother prepared the trad
itional feast. Out in the conservatory, Peter and Katherine 
were enjoying a baked Brie a
nd relaxed holiday conversation. 
 
Then came an utterly unexpected sound. 
 
ﬁHello, Solomons,ﬂ an ai
ry voice said behind them. 
 
Startled, Katherine and her brother spun to see 
an enormous muscular 
figure stepping into 
the conservatory. He wore a black ski mask th
at covered all of his 
face except his eyes, 
which shone with feral ferocity. 
 
Peter was on his feet in an instant.
 ﬁWho are you?! How did you get in here?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI knew your little boy, Zachary, in prison. He 
told me where this key was hidden.ﬂ The 
stranger held up an old key a
nd grinned like a beast. ﬁRight
 before I bludgeoned him to 
death.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s mouth fell open. 
 
A pistol appeared, aimed direc
tly at Peter™s chest. ﬁSit.ﬂ 
 
Peter fell back into his chair. 
 
As the man moved into the room, Katherine was frozen in place. Behind his mask, the 
man™s eyes were wild like those of a rabid animal. 
 
ﬁHey!ﬂ Peter yelled, as if trying to warn th
eir mother in the kitchen. ﬁWhoever you are, 
take what you want, and get out!ﬂ 
 
The man leveled his gun at 
Peter™s chest. ﬁAnd what 
is it you think I want?ﬂ 
 
ﬁJust tell me how much,ﬂ Solomon said. ﬁWe don™t have money in the house, but I canŠ
ﬂ 
 
The monster laughed. ﬁDo not insult me. I have not come for money. I have come tonight 
for Zachary™s other birthright.ﬂ He gr
inned. ﬁHe told me about the pyramid.ﬂ 
 
Pyramid?
 Katherine thought in bewildered terror. 
What pyramid?
 
 
Her brother was defiant. ﬁI don™t 
know what you™re talking about.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDon™t play dumb with me! Zachary told me wh
at you keep in your study vault. I want it. 
Now.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhatever Zachary told you, he was confuse
d,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁI don™t know what you™re 
talking about!ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo?ﬂ The intruder turned and aimed the gun 
at Katherine™s face.
 ﬁHow about now?ﬂ 
 
Peter™s eyes filled w
ith terror. ﬁYou must believe me! 
I don™t know what it is you want!ﬂ 
 
ﬁLie to me one more time,ﬂ he said, still ai
ming at Katherine, ﬁand I swear I will take her 
from you.ﬂ He smiled. ﬁAnd from what Zachary sa
id, your little sister 
is more precious to 
you than all yourŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat™s going on?!ﬂ Katherine™s mother shoute
d, marching into the 
room with Peter™s 
Browning Citori shotgunŠwhich she aimed di
rectly at the man™s chest. The intruder 
spun toward her, and the feisty seventy-five
-year-old woman wasted no time. She fired a 
deafening blast of pellets. The intruder st
aggered backward, firing his handgun wildly in 
all directions, shattering windows as he 
fell and crashed through the glass doorway, 
dropping the pistol
 as he fell. 
 
Peter was instantly in motion, diving on 
the loose handgun. Katherine had fallen, and 
Mrs. Solomon hurried to her side, knee
ling beside her. ﬁMy God, are you hurt?!ﬂ 
 
Katherine shook her head, mute 
with shock. Outside the shatte
red glass door, the masked 
man had clambered to his feet and was running 
into the woods, clutching his side as he 
ran. Peter Solomon glanced back to make sure 
his mother and sister were safe, and seeing 
they were fine, he held the pistol an
d raced out the door after the intruder. 
 
Katherine™s mother held her hand, trem
bling. ﬁThank heavens you™re okay.ﬂ Then 
suddenly her mother pulled away. ﬁKatherine
? You™re bleeding! Th
ere™s blood! You™re 
hurt!ﬂ 
 
Katherine saw the blood. A lot of blood. It 
was all over her. But she felt no pain. 
 
Her mother frantically searched Katherin
e™s body for a wound. ﬁWhere does it hurt!ﬂ 
 
ﬁMom, I don™t know, I don™t feel anything!ﬂ 
 
Then Katherine saw the source of the blood, an
d she went cold. ﬁMom, it™s not me . . .ﬂ 
She pointed to the side of her mother™s
 white satin blouse, where blood was running 
freely, and a small tattered hole was visible. Her mother glanced down, looking more 
confused than anything else. She winced and sh
rank back, as if the pain had just hit her. 
 
ﬁKatherine?ﬂ Her voice was calm, but suddenly it 
carried the weight of her seventy-five 
years. ﬁI need you to call an ambulance.ﬂ 
 
Katherine ran to the hall phone and called 
for help. When she got back to the 
conservatory, she found her mother lying moti
onless in a pool of blood. She ran to her, 
crouching down, cradling her mother™s body in her arms. 
 
Katherine had no idea how much time had pass
ed when she heard the distant gunshot in 
the woods. Finally, the conservatory door burst
 open, and her brother,
 Peter, rushed in, 
eyes wild, gun still in his hand. When he 
saw Katherine sobbing, 
holding their lifeless 
mother in her arms, his face contorted in anguish. The scream that echoed through the 
conservatory was a sound Katherine Solomon would never forget. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 52 
 
 
 
Mal™akh could
 feel the tattooed muscles on his back 
rippling as he sprinted back around 
the building toward the open bay door of Pod 5. 
 
I must gain access to her lab.
 
 
Katherine™s escape had been unanticipated 
. . . and problematic. Not only did she know 
where Mal™akh lived, she now knew his true iden
tity . . . and that he was the one who had 
invaded their home a decade earlier. 
 
Mal™akh had not forgotten that 
night either. He had come w
ithin inches of possessing the 
pyramid, but destiny had obstructed him. 
I was not yet ready.
 But he was ready now. 
More powerful. More influential. Having endur
ed unthinkable hardship in preparation for 
his return, Mal™akh was poised tonight to fulfill 
his destiny at last. He felt certain that 
before the night was over, he would indeed 
be staring into the dying eyes of Katherine 
Solomon. 
 
As Mal™akh reached the bay door, he reassu
red himself that Katherine had not truly 
escaped; she had only prolonged the inevitable
. He slid through th
e opening and strode 
confidently across the darkness until his feet hi
t the carpet. Then he took a right turn and 
headed for the Cube. The banging on the door of Pod 5 had stopped, and Mal™akh 
suspected the guard was now trying to rem
ove the dime Mal™akh had jammed into the 
key panel to render it useless. 
 
When Mal™akh reached the door that led into
 the Cube, he located the outer keypad and 
inserted Trish™s key card. The panel lit up. He
 entered Trish™s PIN and went inside. The 
lights were all ablaze, and as he moved into th
e sterile space, he squinted in amazement at 
the dazzling array of equipmen
t. Mal™akh was no stranger to 
the power of technology; he 
performed his own breed of science in the base
ment of his home, and last night some of 
that science had borne fruit. 
 
The Truth.
 
 
Peter Solomon™s unique confinementŠtrapped al
one in the in-betweenŠhad laid bare all 
of the man™s secrets. 
I can see his soul.
 Mal™akh had learned certain secrets he 
anticipated, and others he had not, includi
ng the news about Katherine™s lab and her 
shocking discoveries. 
Science is getting close,
 Mal™akh had realized. 
And I will not allow 
it to light the way for the unworthy.
 
 
Katherine™s work here had begun using modern
 science to answer 
ancient philosophical 
questions. 
Does anyone hear our prayers? Is th
ere life after death? Do humans have 
souls?
 Incredibly, Katherine had answered
 all of these questions, and more. 
Scientifically. Conclusively. The methods sh
e used were irrefutable. Even the most 
skeptical of people would be persuaded by th
e results of her experiments. If this 
information were published and made known, 
a fundamental shift would begin in the 
consciousness of man. 
They will start to find their way
. Mal™akh™s last task tonight, 
before his transformation, was to en
sure that this did not happen. 
 
As he moved through the lab, Ma
l™akh located the data room
 that Peter had told him 
about. He peered through the heavy glass wall
s at the two holographic data-storage units. 
Exactly as he said they would be
. Mal™akh found it hard to im
agine that the contents of 
these little boxes could change the course 
of human development, and yet Truth had 
always been the most potent of all the catalysts. 
 
Eyeing the holographic storage units, Mal™akh 
produced Trish™s key ca
rd and inserted it 
in the door™s security panel. To his surprise
, the panel did not light
 up. Apparently, access 
to this room was not a trust extended to Tris
h Dunne. He now reached for the key card he 
had found in Katherine™s lab-coat pocket. When
 he inserted this 
one, the panel lit up. 
 
Mal™akh had a problem. 
I never got Katherine™s PIN.
 He tried Trish™s PIN, but it didn™t 
work. Stroking his chin, he stepped back a
nd examined the three-inch-thick Plexiglas 
door. Even with an ax, he knew he would 
be unable to break through and obtain the 
drives he needed to destroy. 
 
Mal™akh had planned for this contingency, however. 
 
Inside the power-supply room, exactly as Pete
r had described, Mal™
akh located the rack 
holding several metal cylinders resembling 
large scuba tanks. The cylinders bore the 
letters 
LH,
 the number 2, and the universal symbol
 for combustible. One of the canisters 
was connected to the lab™s hydrogen fuel cell
.
 
 
Mal™akh left one canister connected and caref
ully heaved one of 
the reserve cylinders 
down onto a dolly beside the rack. Then he 
rolled the cylinder out of the power-supply 
room, across the lab, to the Plexiglas door 
of the data-storage room. Although this 
location would certainly be 
plenty close enough, he had not
iced one weakness in the 
heavy Plexiglas doorŠthe small space between the bottom and the jamb. 
 
At the threshold, he carefully la
id the canister on its side and 
slid the flexible rubber tube 
beneath the door. It took hi
m a moment to remove the safety seals and access the 
cylinder™s valve, but once he did, ever so 
gently, he uncocked the valve. Through the 
Plexiglas, he could see the cl
ear, bubbling liquid begin drai
ning out of the tube onto the 
floor inside the storage room. Mal™akh 
watched the puddle expand, oozing across the 
floor, steaming and bubbling as it grew. Hydroge
n remained in liquid form only when it 
was cold, and as it warmed up, it would start to
 boil off. The resulting gas, conveniently, 
was even more flammable than the liquid. 
 
Remember the Hindenburg.
 
 
Mal™akh hurried now into the 
lab and retrieved the Pyrex ju
g of Bunsen-burner fuelŠa 
viscous, highly flammable, yet noncombustible 
oil. He carried it to the Plexiglas door, 
pleased to see the liquid hydrogen canister 
was still draining, the puddle of boiling liquid 
inside the data-storage room 
now covering the entire floor, 
encircling the pedestals that 
supported the holographic storage units. A whitis
h mist now rose from the boiling puddle 
as the liquid hydrogen began turning to gas . . . filling the small space. 
 
Mal™akh raised the jug of Bunsen-burner 
fuel and squirted a healthy amount on the 
hydrogen canister, the tubing, and into the sm
all opening beneath the door. Then, very 
carefully, he began backing out of the lab, le
aving an unbroken stream of oil on the floor 
as he went. 
 
The dispatch operator handling 911 calls for 
Washington, D.C., had been unusually busy 
tonight. 
Football, beer, and a full moon,
 she thought as yet another emergency call 
appeared on her screen, this one from a ga
s-station pay phone on the Suitland Parkway in 
Anacostia. A 
car accident probably.
 
 
ﬁNine-one-one,ﬂ she answered. ﬁWhat is your emergency?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI was just attacked at th
e Smithsonian Museum Support Center,ﬂ a panicked woman™s 
voice said. ﬁPlease send the police! 
Forty-two-ten Silver Hill Road!ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay, slow down,ﬂ the opera
tor said. ﬁYou need toŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI need you to send officers also to a mans
ion in Kalorama Heights where I think my 
brother may be held captive!ﬂ 
 
The operator sighed. 
Full moon.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 53 
 
 
 
As I tried
 to tell you,ﬂ Bellamy was saying to Langdon, ﬁthere is more to this pyramid 
than meets the eye.ﬂ 
 
Apparently so.
 Langdon had to admit that the stone pyramid sitting in his unzipped 
daybag looked much more mysterious to hi
m now. His decryption of the Masonic cipher 
had rendered a seemingly mean
ingless grid of letters. 
 
Chaos
. 
 
 
 
For a long while, Langdon examined the grid, se
arching for any hint of meaning within 
the lettersŠhidden words, anagrams, clues of any sortŠbut he found nothing. 
 
ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid,ﬂ Bellamy explained, ﬁi
s said to guard its 
secrets behind many 
veils. Each time you pull back a curtain, you face another. You have unveiled these 
letters, and yet they tell you 
nothing until you peel back another layer. Of course, the way 
to do that is known only to the one who holds the capstone. The 
capstone,
 I suspect, has 
an inscription as well, which tells
 you how to decipher the pyramid.ﬂ 
 
Langdon glanced at the cube-shaped package on 
the desk. From what Bellamy had said, 
Langdon now understood that the capstone a
nd pyramid were a ﬁsegmented cipherﬂŠa 
code broken into pieces. Modern cryptologi
sts used segmented ciphers all the time, 
although the security scheme had been invented in ancient Greece. The Greeks, when 
they wanted to store secret information, inscri
bed it on a clay tablet 
and then shattered the 
tablet into pieces, storing each piece in a sepa
rate location. Only when all the pieces were 
gathered together could the secrets be read. 
This kind of inscribed clay tabletŠcalled a 
symbolonŠwas in fact the origin of the modern word 
symbol
. 
 
ﬁRobert,ﬂ Bellamy said, ﬁthis pyramid and capst
one have been kept apart for generations, 
ensuring the secret™s safety.ﬂ
 His tone turned rueful. ﬁT
onight, however, the pieces have 
come dangerously close. I™m sure I don™t have to
 say this . . . but it 
is our duty to ensure 
this pyramid is not assembled.ﬂ 
 
Langdon found Bellamy™s sense of dram
a to be somewhat overwrought. 
Is he describing 
the capstone and pyramid . . . or a detonator and nuclear bomb?
 He still couldn™t quite 
accept Bellamy™s claims, but it hardly seemed to matter. ﬁEven if this 
is
 the Masonic 
Pyramid, and even if this inscription doe
s somehow reveal the location of ancient 
knowledge, how could that knowledge possibly 
impart the kind of power it is said to 
impart?ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter always told me you were a hard ma
n to convinceŠan academic who prefers proof 
to speculation.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re saying you 
do
 believe that?ﬂ Langdon demanded, feeling impatient now. 
ﬁRespectfully . . . you are a modern, educated man. How could you believe such a 
thing?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy gave a patient smile. ﬁThe craft of Freemasonry has given me a deep respect for 
that which transcends human understanding. I™ve learned 
never
 to close my mind to an 
idea simply because it seems miraculous.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 54 
 
 
 
Frantically,
 the SMSC perimeter patrolman dashed down the gravel pathway that ran 
along the outside of the buildi
ng. He™d just received a call 
from an officer inside saying 
that the keypad to Pod 5 had been sabotaged, 
and that a security light indicated that Pod 
5™s specimen bay door was now open. 
 
What the hell is going on?!
 
 
As he arrived at the specimen bay, sure 
enough he found the door open a couple of feet. 
Bizarre,
 he thought. 
This can only be unlocked from the inside.
 He took the flashlight off 
his belt and shone it into the inky blackness 
of the pod. Nothing. Having no desire to step 
into the unknown, he moved only 
as far as the threshold and 
then stuck the flashlight 
through the opening, swinging it to 
the left, and then to theŠ 
 
Powerful hands seized his wrist and yanke
d him into the blackness. The guard felt 
himself being spun around by an invisible force.
 He smelled ethanol. 
The flashlight flew 
out of his hand, and before he could even 
process what was happening, a rock-hard fist 
collided with his sternum. The guard crumpled to the cement floor . . . groaning in pain as 
a large black form stepped away from him. 
 
The guard lay on his side, gasping and wheezing 
for breath. His flashlight lay nearby, its 
beam spilling across the floor and illuminating wh
at appeared to be a metal can of some 
sort. The can™s label said it was 
fuel oil for a Bunsen burner. 
 
A cigarette lighter sparked, and the orange fl
ame illuminated a vision that hardly seemed 
human. 
Jesus Christ!
 The guard barely had time to process what he was seeing before the 
bare-chested creature knelt down an
d touched the flame to the floor. 
 
Instantly, a strip of fire ma
terialized, leaping away from them, racing into the void. 
Bewildered, the guard looked back, but the cr
eature was already slipping out the open 
bay door into the night. 
 
The guard managed to sit up, wincing in pain as his eyes followed the thin ribbon of fire. 
What the hell?!
 The flame looked too small to be truly  
dangerous, and yet now he saw something 
utterly terrifying. The fire was no longer 
illuminating only the darkened void. It had travel
ed all the way to the back wall, where it 
was now illuminating a massive cinder-block structure. The guard had never been 
permitted inside Pod 5, but he knew very well what this structure must be. 
 
The Cube.
 
 
Katherine Solomon™s lab.
 
 
The flame raced in a straight 
line directly to the lab™s outer
 door. The guard clambered to 
his feet, knowing full well that 
the ribbon of oil probably con
tinued beneath the lab door . 
. . and would soon start a fire inside. But as he turned to run for help, he felt an 
unexpected puff of air sucking past him. 
 
For a brief instant, all of Pod 5 was bathed in light. 
 
The guard never saw the hydrogen fireball er
upting skyward, ripping 
the roof off Pod 5 
and billowing hundreds of feet into the air. 
Nor did he see the sky 
raining fragments of 
titanium mesh, electronic equipment, and 
droplets of melted silicon from the lab™s 
holographic storage units. 
 
Katherine Solomon was driving north when sh
e saw the sudden flash of light in her 
rearview mirror. A deep rumble thundere
d through the night air, startling her. 
 
Fireworks?
 she wondered. 
Do the Redskins have a halftime show?
 
 
She refocused on the road, her thoughts st
ill on the 911 call she™
d placed from the 
deserted gas station™s pay phone. 
 
Katherine had successfully conv
inced the 911 dispatcher to 
send the police to the SMSC 
to investigate a tattooed intrud
er and, Katherine prayed, to 
find her assistant, Trish. In 
addition, she urged the dispatcher to check 
Dr. Abaddon™s address in Kalorama Heights, 
where she thought Peter was being held hostage. 
 
Unfortunately, Katherine had been unable to
 obtain Robert Langdon™
s unlisted cell-phone 
number. So now, seeing no other option, she was speeding toward the Library of 
Congress, where Langdon had told her he was headed. 
 
The terrifying revelation of
 Dr. Abaddon™s true identity had changed everything. 
Katherine had no idea what to believe anymore. All she knew for certain was that the 
same man who had killed her mother and 
nephew all those years ago had now captured 
her brother and had come to kill her. 
Who is this madman? What does he want?
 The only 
answer she could come up with made no sense. 
A pyramid?
 Equally confusing was why 
this man had come to her lab tonight. If he 
wanted to hurt her, why hadn™t he done so in 
the privacy of his own home 
earlier today? Why go to th
e trouble of sending a text 
message and risk breaking into her lab? 
 
Unexpectedly, the fireworks in her rearview
 mirror grew bright
er, the initial flash 
followed by an unexpected sightŠa blazing oran
ge fireball that Katherine could see 
rising above the tree line. 
What in the world?!
 The fireball was accompanied by dark 
black smoke . . . and it was nowhere near 
the Redskins™ FedEx Field. Bewildered, she 
tried to determine what industry might be locate
d on the other side of those trees . . . just 
southeast of the parkway. 
 
Then, like an oncoming truck, it hit her. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 55 
 
 
 
Warren Bellamy
 stabbed urgently at the buttons on 
his cell phone, trying again to make 
contact with someone who could help them, whoever that might be. 
 
Langdon watched Bellamy, but his mind was with 
Peter, trying to figure out how best to 
find him. 
Decipher the engraving,
 Peter™s captor had commanded, 
and it will tell you the 
hiding place of mankind™s greatest treasure
 . . . 
We will go together . . . and make our 
trade.
 
 
Bellamy hung up, frowning. Still no answer. 
 
ﬁHere™s what I don™t understand,ﬂ Langdon sai
d. ﬁEven if I could somehow accept that 
this hidden wisdom exists . . . and that 
this pyramid somehow poi
nts to its underground 
location . . . what am I looking for? A vault? A bunker?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy sat quietly for a long moment. Th
en he gave a reluctant sigh and spoke 
guardedly. ﬁRobert, according to what I™ve hear
d through the years, the pyramid leads to 
the entrance of a spiral staircase.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA 
staircase
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s right. A staircase th
at leads down into the earth 
. . . many hundreds of feet.ﬂ 
 
Langdon could not believe what he wa
s hearing. He leaned closer. 
 
ﬁI™ve heard it said that the ancien
t wisdom is buried at the bottom.ﬂ 
 
Robert Langdon stood up and began pacing. 
A spiral staircase descending hundreds of 
feet into the earth . . 
. in Washington, D.C. ﬁ
And nobody has ever 
seen
 this staircase?ﬂ 
 
ﬁAllegedly the entrance has been co
vered with an enormous stone.ﬂ 
 
Langdon sighed. The idea of a tomb covered with
 an enormous stone was right out of the 
biblical accounts of Jesus™ tomb. This archet
ypal hybrid was the grandfather of them all. 
ﬁWarren, do 
you
 believe this secret mystical 
staircase into the earth exists?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ve never seen it personally, but a few of 
the older Masons swear it exists. I was trying 
to call one of them just now.ﬂ 
 
Langdon continued pacing, uncertain what to say next. 
 
ﬁRobert, you leave me a difficult task with 
respect to this pyramid.ﬂ Warren Bellamy™s 
gaze hardened in the soft glow of th
e reading lamp. ﬁI know of no way to 
force
 a man to 
believe what he does not want to belie
ve. And yet I hope you understand your duty to 
Peter Solomon.ﬂ 
 
Yes, I have a duty to
 help 
him,
 Langdon thought. 
 
ﬁI don™t need you to believe in the power this pyramid can unveil. Nor do I need you to 
believe in the staircase it 
supposedly leads to. But I 
do
 need you to believe that you are 
morally obliged to protect this secret . . . 
whatever it may be.ﬂ Bellamy motioned to the 
little cube-shaped package. ﬁPeter entruste
d the capstone to you because he had faith you 
would obey his wishes and keep it secret. A
nd now you must do exactly that, even if it 
means sacrificing Peter™s life.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stopped short and wheeled around. ﬁWhat?!ﬂ 
 
Bellamy remained seated, his expression pained
 but resolute. ﬁIt™s what he would want. 
You need to forget Peter. He™s gone. Peter di
d his job, doing the best 
he could to protect 
the pyramid. Now it is 
our
 job to make sure his efforts were not in vain.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI can™t believe you™re saying 
this!ﬂ Langdon exclaimed, temper
 flaring. ﬁEven if this 
pyramid is everything you say it is, Peter is
 your Masonic brother.
 You™re sworn to 
protect him above all else, even your country!ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, Robert. A Mason must protect a fellow Ma
son above all things . . . except oneŠthe 
great secret our brotherhood pr
otects for all mankind. Whether or not I believe this lost 
wisdom has the potential that hi
story suggests, I have taken 
a vow to keep it out of the 
hands of the unworthy. And I would not give it 
over to anyone . . . even in exchange for 
Peter Solomon™s life.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know plenty of Masons,ﬂ Langdon said angrily, ﬁincluding the most advanced, and I™m 
damned sure these men are not sworn to sacr
ifice their lives for the sake of a stone 
pyramid. And I™m also damned sure none of 
them believes in a s
ecret staircase that 
descends to a treasure bu
ried deep in the earth.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere are circles 
within
 circles, Robert. Not every
one
 knows every
thing
.ﬂ 
 
Langdon exhaled, trying to control his emoti
ons. He, like everyone, had heard the rumors 
of elite circles within the Masons. Whether or
 not it was true seemed irrelevant in the 
face of this situation. ﬁWarre
n, if this pyramid and capstone
 truly reveal the ultimate 
Masonic secret, then why would Peter involve 
me
? I™m not even a brother . . . much less 
part of any inner circle.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know, and I suspect that is precisely 
why
 Peter chose you to guard it. This pyramid has 
been targeted in the past, even by those 
who infiltrated our br
otherhood with unworthy 
motives. Peter™s choice to store it 
outside
 the brotherhood was a clever one.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWere you aware I had the capstone?ﬂ Langdon asked. 
 
ﬁNo. And if Peter told anyone 
at all, it would have been only one man.ﬂ Bellamy pulled 
out his cell phone and hit redial. ﬁAnd so far, 
I™ve been unable to reach him.ﬂ He got a 
voice-mail greeting and hung up. ﬁWell, Robert
, it looks like you and I are on our own 
for the moment. And we have a decision to make.ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked at his Mickey Mouse watch. 
9:42 P.M. ﬁYou do realize that Peter™s 
captor is waiting for me to decipher this pyramid 
tonight
 and tell him what it says.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy frowned. ﬁGreat men throughout history 
have made deep pers
onal sacrifices to 
protect the Ancient Mysterie
s. You and I must do the same.ﬂ He stood up now. ﬁWe 
should keep moving. Sooner or later Sa
to will figure out where we are.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat about Katherine?!ﬂ Langdon demanded, not 
wanting to leave. ﬁI can™t reach her, 
and she never called.ﬂ 
 
ﬁObviously, something happened.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut we can™t just abandon her!ﬂ 
 
ﬁForget Katherine!ﬂ Bellamy said, his voice commanding now. ﬁForget Peter! Forget 
everyone! Don™t you understand, Robert, that you
™ve been entrusted with a duty that is 
bigger than all of usŠyou, Pe
ter, Katherine, myself?ﬂ He locked eyes with Langdon. 
ﬁWe need to find a safe place to hide this pyramid and capstone far fromŠﬂ 
 
A loud metallic crash echoed in th
e direction of the great hall. 
 
Bellamy wheeled, eyes filling 
with fear. ﬁThat was fast.ﬂ 
 
Langdon turned toward the door. The sound appa
rently had come fr
om the metal bucket 
that Bellamy had placed on the ladder blocking the tunnel doors. 
They™re coming for us.
 
 
Then, quite unexpectedly, 
the crash echoed again. 
 
And again. 
 
And again. 
 
The homeless man on the bench in front of th
e Library of Congress 
rubbed his eyes and 
watched the strange scen
e unfolding before him. 
 
A white Volvo had just jumped the curb, lurc
hed across the deserted
 pedestrian walkway, 
and screeched to a halt at the foot of the li
brary™s main entrance. An attractive, dark-
haired woman had leaped out, anxiously su
rveyed the area, and, 
spotting the homeless 
man, had shouted, ﬁDo you have a phone?ﬂ 
 
Lady, I don™t have a left shoe.
 
 
Apparently realizing as much, the woman da
shed up the staircase toward the library™s 
main doors. Arriving at the top of the stairs
, she grabbed the handle and tried desperately 
to open each of the three giant doors. 
 
The library™s closed, lady.
 
 
But the woman didn™t seem to care. She seized one of the heavy ring-shaped handles, 
heaved it backward, and let it fall with a 
loud crash against the door. Then she did it 
again. And again. And again. 
 
Wow,
 the homeless man thought, 
she must really need a book.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 56 
 
 
 
When Katherine Solomon
 finally saw the massive bronze doors of the library swing 
open before her, she felt as if
 an emotional floodgate had burst. All the fear and confusion 
she had bottled up tonight came pouring through. 
 
The figure in the library doorway was Warren Bellamy, a friend and confidant of her 
brother™s. But it was the man behind Bellamy
 in the shadows whom Katherine felt 
happiest to see. The feeling was apparently
 mutual. Robert Langdon™s eyes filled with 
relief as she rushed through the door
way . . . directly into his arms. 
 
As Katherine lost herself in the comforting embrace of an old friend, Bellamy closed the 
front door. She heard the heavy lock click into 
place, and at last she felt safe. Tears came 
unexpectedly, but she fought them back. 
 
Langdon held her. ﬁIt™s okay,ﬂ he whispered. ﬁYou™re okay.ﬂ 
 
Because you saved me,
 Katherine wanted to tell him. 
He destroyed my lab . . . all my 
work. Years of research . . . up in smoke.
 She wanted to tell him 
everything, but she could 
barely breathe. 
 
ﬁWe™ll find Peter.ﬂ Langdon™s deep voice res
onated against her chest, comforting her 
somehow. ﬁI promise.ﬂ 
 
I know who did this!
 Katherine wanted to yell. 
The same man who killed my mother and 
nephew!
 Before she could explain herself, an 
unexpected sound broke the silence of the 
library. 
 
The loud crash echoed up from beneath them in
 a vestibule stairwellŠas if a large metal 
object had fallen on a tile floor. Katherin
e felt Langdon™s muscles stiffen instantly. 
 
Bellamy stepped forward, his e
xpression dire. ﬁWe™re leaving. 
Now
.ﬂ 
 
Bewildered, Katherine followed as the Ar
chitect and Langdon hurri
ed across the great 
hall toward the library™s famed reading r
oom, which was ablaze with light. Bellamy 
quickly locked the two sets of doors behi
nd them, first the outer, then the inner. 
 
Katherine followed in a daze as Bellamy hustled them both toward the center of the 
room. The threesome arrived at a reading de
sk where a leather bag sat beneath a light. 
Beside the bag, there was a tiny cube-sha
ped package, which Bellamy scooped up and 
placed inside the bag, alongside aŠ 
 
Katherine stopped short. 
A pyramid?
 
 
Although she had never seen th
is engraved stone pyramid, she felt her entire body recoil 
in recognition. Somehow her gut knew the truth. Katherine Solomon had just come face-
to-face with the object that had so deeply damaged her life. 
The pyramid.
 
 
Bellamy zipped up the bag and handed it to 
Langdon. ﬁDon™t let this 
out of your sight.ﬂ 
 
A sudden explosion rocked the room™s outer
 doors. The tinkling of shattered glass 
followed. 
 
ﬁThis way!ﬂ Bellamy spun, looking scared now 
as he rushed them over to the central 
circulation deskŠeight counters around a ma
ssive octagonal cabinet. He guided them in 
behind the counters and then pointed to an
 opening in the cabinet. ﬁGet in there!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIn 
there
?ﬂ Langdon demanded. ﬁThey™ll find us for sure!ﬂ 
 
ﬁTrust me,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁIt™s not what you think.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 57 
 
 
 
Mal™akh gunned
 his limousine north toward Kalorama Heights. The explosion in 
Katherine™s lab had been bigger 
than he had anticipated, and he had been lucky to escape 
unscathed. Conveniently, the en
suing chaos had enabled hi
m to slip out without 
opposition, powering his limousine past a distract
ed gate guard who was busy yelling into 
a telephone. 
 
I™ve got to get off the road,
 he thought. If Katherine ha
dn™t yet phoned the police, the 
explosion would certainly
 draw their attention. 
And a shirtless man driving a limousine 
would be hard to miss.
 
 
After years of preparation, Mal™akh could sc
arcely believe the night was now upon him. 
The journey to this moment had been a long, difficult one. 
What began years ago in 
misery . . . will end tonight in glory.
 
 
On the night it all began, he had not had th
e name Mal™akh. In f
act, on the night it all 
began, he had not had any name at all. 
Inmate 37
. Like most of the prisoners at the brutal 
Soganlik Prison outside of Istanbul, In
mate 37 was here because of drugs. 
 
He had been lying on his bunk in a cement
 cell, hungry and cold in the darkness, 
wondering how long he would be incarcerate
d. His new cellmate, whom he™d met only 
twenty-four hours ago, was sleepin
g in the bunk above him. The prison administrator, an 
obese alcoholic who hated his job and took it ou
t on the inmates, had just killed all the 
lights for the night. 
 
It was almost ten o™clock when Inmate 37 
heard the conversation 
filtering in through the 
ventilation shaft. The first voice was unmistakably clearŠthe piercing, belligerent accent 
of the prison administrator, who clearly di
d not appreciate being w
oken up by a late-night 
visitor. 
 
ﬁYes, yes, you™ve come a long way,ﬂ he was sa
ying, ﬁbut there are no visitors for the first 
month. State regulations. No exceptions.ﬂ 
 
The voice that replied was soft and refined, filled with pain. ﬁIs my son safe?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe is a drug addict.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIs he being treated well?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell enough,ﬂ the administrator 
said. ﬁThis is not a hotel.ﬂ 
 
There was a pained pause. ﬁYou do realize 
the U.S. State Department will request 
extradition.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, yes, they always do. It will be gr
anted, although the paperwork might take us a 
couple of weeks . . . or even a month . . . depending.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDepending on what?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell,ﬂ the administrator said, ﬁwe are unders
taffed.ﬂ He paused. ﬁOf course, sometimes 
concerned parties like yourself make donations 
to the prison staff to help us push things 
through more quickly.ﬂ 
 
The visitor did not reply. 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon,ﬂ the administrator continued, 
lowering his voice, ﬁfor a man like yourself, 
for whom money is no object, there are alwa
ys options. I know people in government. If 
you and I work together, we may be able
 to get your son out of here . . . 
tomorrow,
 with 
all the charges dropped. He would not even
 have to face prosecution at home.ﬂ 
 
The response was immediate. ﬁForgetting th
e legal ramifications of your suggestion, I 
refuse to teach my son that money solves all 
problems or that there is no accountability in 
life, especially in a serious matter like this.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™d like to 
leave
 him here?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™d like to speak to him. Right now.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAs I said, we have rules. Your son is una
vailable to you . . . unless you would like to 
negotiate his immediate release.ﬂ 
 
A cold silence hung for several moments. ﬁT
he State Department will be contacting you. 
Keep Zachary safe. I expect him on a pl
ane home within the week. Good night.ﬂ 
 
The door slammed. 
 
Inmate 37 could not believe his ears. 
What kind of father leaves 
his son in this hellhole in 
order to teach him a lesson?
 Peter Solomon had even rejected an offer to clear Zachary™s 
record. 
 
It was later that night, lyi
ng awake in his bunk, that Inmate 
37 had realized how he would 
free himself. If money was the only thing 
separating a prisoner from freedom, then 
Inmate 37 was as good as free. Peter Solomon might not be willing to part with money, 
but as anyone who read the tabloids knew, 
his son, Zachary, had plenty of money, too. 
The next day, Inmate 37 spoke privately to 
the administrator and suggested a planŠa 
bold, ingenious scheme that would give 
them both exactly what they wanted. 
 
ﬁZachary Solomon would have to die for this
 to work,ﬂ explained Inmate 37. ﬁBut we 
could both disappear immediately. You could 
retire to the Greek Islands. You would 
never see this place again.ﬂ 
 
After some discussion, the two men shook hands. 
Soon Zachary Solomon will be dead,
 
Inmate 37 thought, smiling to think how easy it would be. 
 
It was two days later that the State Depart
ment contacted the Solomon family with the 
horrific news. The prison snapshots showed
 their son™s brutally bludgeoned body, lying 
curled and lifeless on the floor of his prison ce
ll. His head had been bashed in by a steel 
bar, and the rest of him was battered and 
twisted beyond what was humanly imaginable. 
He appeared to have been tortured and fi
nally killed. The prime suspect was the prison 
administrator himself, who had disappeared, 
probably with all of the murdered boy™s 
money. Zachary had signed papers moving hi
s vast fortune into a private numbered 
account, which had been emptied immediatel
y following his death. There was no telling 
where the money was now. 
 
Peter Solomon flew to Turkey on a private jet and returned with their son™s casket, which 
they buried in the Solomon family cemetery. The prison administrator was never found. 
Nor 
would
 he be, Inmate 37 knew. The Turk™s rotund body was now resting at the bottom 
of the Sea of Marmara, feeding the blue 
manna crabs that migrated in through the 
Bosporus Strait. The vast fortune belonging 
to Zachary Solomon had all been moved to 
an untraceable numbered account. Inmate 37 wa
s a free man againŠa free man with a 
massive fortune. 
 
The Greek Islands were like heave
n. The light. The water. The women. 
 
There was nothing money couldn™t buyŠnew 
identities, new passports, new hope. He 
chose a Greek nameŠAndros DareiosŠ
Andros
 meaning ﬁwarrior,ﬂ and 
Dareios
 
meaning ﬁwealthy.ﬂ The dark nights in pris
on had frightened him,
 and Andros vowed 
never to go back. He shaved off his shaggy 
hair and shunned the dr
ug world entirely. He 
began life anewŠexploring never-before-imagin
ed sensual pleasures. The serenity of 
sailing alone on the ink-blue Aegean Sea becam
e his new heroin trance; the sensuality of 
sucking moist 
arni souvlakia
 right off the skewer became his new Ecstasy; and the rush 
of cliff diving into the foam-filled ravi
nes of Mykonos became his new cocaine. 
 
I am reborn.
 
 
Andros bought a sprawling villa on the island of Syros and settled in among the 
bella 
gente
 in the exclusive town of 
Possidonia. This new world was a community not only of 
wealth, but of culture and physical perfec
tion. His neighbors took great pride in their 
bodies and minds, and it was contagious. Th
e newcomer suddenly found himself jogging 
on the beach, tanning his pale body, and reading books. Andros read Homer™s 
Odyssey,
 
captivated by the images of powerful bronze 
men doing battle on these islands. The next 
day, he began lifting weights, and was amazed
 to see how quickly his chest and arms 
grew larger. Gradually, he began to feel 
women™s eyes on him, and the admiration was 
intoxicating. He longed to grow stronger stil
l. And he did. With the help of aggressive 
cycles of steroids intermix
ed with black-market growth 
hormones and endless hours of 
weight lifting, Andros transformed himself 
into something he had never imagined he 
could beŠa perfect male specimen. He grew 
in both height and mu
sculature, developing 
flawless pectorals and massive, sinewy le
gs, which he kept perfectly tanned. 
 
Everyone
 was looking now. 
 
As Andros had been warned, the heavy ster
oids and hormones changed not only his body, 
but also his voice box, giving him 
an eerie, breathy whisper, 
which made him feel more 
mysterious. The soft, enigmatic voice, comb
ined with his new body, his wealth, and his 
refusal to speak about his mysterious past, 
served as catnip for the women who met him. 
They gave themselves willingly, and he satisfied them allŠfrom fashion models visiting 
his island on photo shoots, to nubile American
 college girls on vacation, to the lonely 
wives of his neighbors, to the occa
sional young man. They could not get enough. 
 
I am a masterpiece.
 
 
As the years passed, however, Andros™s sexual 
adventures began to lose their thrill. As 
did everything. The island™s sumptuous cuisin
e lost its taste, books no longer held his 
interest, and even the dazzling s
unsets from his villa looked dull. 
How could this be?
 He 
was only in his midtwentie
s, and yet he felt old. 
What more is there to life?
 He had 
sculpted his body into a masterpiece; he ha
d educated himself and nourished his mind 
with culture; he had made his home in paradi
se; and he had the love of anyone he desired. 
 
And yet, incredibly, he felt as empt
y as he had in that Turkish prison. 
 
What is it I am missing?
 
 
The answer had come to him several months la
ter. Andros was sitting alone in his villa, 
absently surfing channels in the middle of the night, when he stumbled across a program 
about the secrets of Freemas
onry. The show was poorly done, posing more questions than 
answers, and yet he found himself intrigued 
by the plethora of conspiracy theories 
surrounding the brotherhood. The narrator described legend after legend. 
 
Freemasons and the New World Order . . .
 
 
The Great Masonic Seal of the United States . . .
 
 
The P2 Masonic Lodge . . .
 
 
The Lost Secret of Freemasonry . . .
 
 
The Masonic Pyramid . . .
 
 
Andros sat up, startled. 
Pyramid
. The narrator began recounting 
the story of a mysterious 
stone pyramid whose encrypted engraving pr
omised to lead to lost wisdom and 
unfathomable power. The story, though seemingl
y implausible, sparked in him a distant 
memory . . . a faint recollection from a much darker time. Andros remembered what 
Zachary Solomon had heard from his 
father about a mysterious pyramid. 
 
Could it be?
 Andros strained to 
recall the details. 
 
When the show ended, he stepped out onto 
the balcony, lett
ing the cool air clear his 
mind. He remembered more now, and as it all 
came back, he began to sense there might 
be some truth to this legend after all. A
nd if so, then Zachary SolomonŠalthough long 
deadŠstill had something to offer. 
 
What do I have to lose?
 
 
Three weeks later, his timing carefully planne
d, Andros stood in the frigid cold outside 
the conservatory of the Solomons™ Potomac es
tate. Through the glass,
 he could see Peter 
Solomon chatting and laughing w
ith his sister, Katherine. 
It looks like they™ve had no 
trouble forgetting Zachary,
 he thought. 
 
Before he pulled the ski mask over his face, A
ndros took a hit of cocaine, his first in ages. 
He felt the familiar rush of fearlessness. 
He pulled out a handgun, used an old key to 
unlock the door, and stepped 
inside. ﬁHello, Solomons.ﬂ 
 
Unfortunately, the night had not
 gone as Andros had planned.
 Rather than obtaining the 
pyramid for which he had come, he found hims
elf riddled with bird
 shot and fleeing 
across the snow-covered lawn to
ward the dense woods. To his surprise, behind him, Peter 
Solomon was giving chase, pistol glinting in
 his hand. Andros dashed into the woods, 
running down a trail along the edge of a deep 
ravine. Far below, the sounds of a waterfall 
echoed up through the crisp winter air. He 
passed a stand of oak trees and rounded a 
corner to his left. Seconds later, he wa
s skidding to a stop on the icy path, narrowly 
escaping death. 
 
My God!
 
 
Only feet in front of him, the path ended, 
plunging straight down into an icy river far 
below. The large boulder at the side of the 
path had been carved by 
the unskilled hand of 
a child: 
 
 
 
 
 
On the far side of the ravine, the path continued on. 
So where™s the bridge?!
 The cocaine 
was no longer working. 
I™m trapped!
 Panicking now, Andros turned to flee back up the 
path, but he found himself facing Peter Solom
on, who stood breathless before him, pistol 
in hand. 
 
Andros looked at the gun and took a step 
backward. The drop behind him was at least 
fifty feet to an ice-covered river. The mist from the waterfall upstream billowed around 
them, chilling him to the bone. 
 
ﬁZach™s bridge rotted out long ago,ﬂ Solo
mon said, panting. ﬁHe was the only one who 
ever came down this far.ﬂ Solomon held the gun remarkably steady. ﬁWhy did you kill 
my son?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe was nothing,ﬂ Andros replied. ﬁA
 drug addict. I did him a favor.ﬂ 
 
Solomon moved closer, gun aimed directly at
 Andros™s chest. 
ﬁPerhaps I should do 
you
 
the same favor.ﬂ His tone was surprisingly fierce. ﬁYou 
bludgeoned
 my son to death. 
How does a man do such a thing?ﬂ 
 
ﬁMen do the unthinkable when pushed to the brink.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou 
killed
 my son!ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Andros replied, hotly now. ﬁ
You
 killed your son. What kind of man leaves his son 
in a prison when he has the option to get him out! 
You
 killed your son! Not me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou know 
nothing
!ﬂ Solomon yelled, his voice filled with pain. 
 
You™re wrong,
 Andros thought. 
I know everything.
 
 
Peter Solomon drew closer, only five yard
s away now, gun leveled. Andros™s chest was 
burning, and he could tell he was bleedi
ng badly. The warmth ran down over his 
stomach. He looked over his shoulder at th
e drop. Impossible. He turned back to 
Solomon. ﬁI know more about you than you think,ﬂ he whispered. ﬁI know you are not 
the kind of man who kills in cold blood.ﬂ 
 
Solomon stepped closer, taking dead aim. 
 
ﬁI™m warning you,ﬂ Andros said, ﬁif you pull 
that trigger, I wi
ll haunt you forever.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou already will.ﬂ And with that, Solomon fired. 
 
As he raced his black limousine back toward
 Kalorama Heights, the one who now called 
himself Mal™akh reflected on the miraculous ev
ents that had delivered him from certain 
death atop that icy ravine. He had been 
transformed forever. The gunshot had echoed 
only for an instant, and yet its effects ha
d reverberated across decades. His body, once 
tanned and perfect, was now marred by scars from
 that night . . . scars he kept hidden 
beneath the tattooed symbols of his new identity. 
 
I am Mal™akh.
 
 
This was my destiny all along.
 
 
He had walked through fire, been reduced to ashes, and then emerged again . . . 
transformed once more. Tonight would be th
e final step of his long and magnificent 
journey. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 58 
 
 
 
The coyly
 nicknamed explosive Key4 had been de
veloped by Special Forces specifically 
for opening locked doors with minimal collateral damage. Consisting primarily of 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine with a diethylhe
xyl plasticizer, it was es
sentially a piece of 
C-4 rolled into paper-thin sheet
s for insertion into doorjambs. 
In the case of the library™s 
reading room, the explosive had worked perfectly. 
 
Operation leader Agent Turner Simkins st
epped over the wreckage of the doors and 
scanned the massive octagonal room fo
r any signs of movement. Nothing. 
 
ﬁKill the lights,ﬂ Simkins said. 
 
A second agent found the wall panel, threw 
the switches, and plunged the room into 
darkness. In unison, all four men reach
ed up and yanked down their night-vision 
headgear, adjusting the goggl
es over their eyes. They st
ood motionless, surveying the 
reading room, which now materialized in shades of luminescent green inside their 
goggles. 
 
The scene remained unchanged. 
 
Nobody made a dash for it in the dark. 
 
The fugitives were probably unarmed, and yet the field team entered the room with 
weapons raised. In the darkness, their firear
ms projected four menacing rods of laser 
light. The men washed the beams in all direc
tions, across the floor, up the far walls, into 
the balconies, probing the darkness. Oftentim
es, a mere glimpse of a laser-sighted 
weapon in a darkened room was e
nough to induce instant surrender. 
 
Apparently not tonight.
 
 
Still no movement. 
 
Agent Simkins raised his hand, motioning his team into the space. Silently, the men 
fanned out. Moving cautiously up the center ai
sle, Simkins reached up and flipped a 
switch on his goggles, activating the newest 
addition to the CIA™s arsenal. Thermal 
imaging had been around for years, but recent
 advances in miniaturization, differential 
sensitivity, and dual-source integration ha
d facilitated a new generation of vision 
enhancing equipment that gave field agen
ts eyesight that bordered on superhuman. 
 
We see in the dark. We see through walls
. And now . . . we see back in time.
 
 
Thermal-imaging equipment had become so se
nsitive to heat differentials that it could 
detect not only a person™s location . . . but their 
previous
 locations. The ability to see into 
the past often proved the most 
valuable asset of all. And tonight, once again, it proved its 
worth. Agent Simkins now spied a thermal signatu
re at one of the re
ading desks. The two 
wooden chairs luminesced in his goggles, regi
stering a reddish-purple color, indicating 
those chairs were warmer than the other chai
rs in the room. The desk lamp™s bulb glowed 
orange. Obviously the two men had been sittin
g at the desk, but the question now was in 
which direction they had gone. 
 
He found his answer on the central counter 
that surrounded the large wooden console in 
the middle of the room. A ghostly handprint, glowing crimson. 
 
Weapon raised, Simkins moved toward the oc
tagonal cabinet, trai
ning his laser sight 
across the surface. He circled until he saw 
an opening in the side of the console. 
Did they 
really corner themselves in a cabinet?
 The agent scanned the trim around the opening 
and saw another glowing handprint on it. Cl
early someone had grabbed the doorjamb as 
he ducked inside the console. 
 
The time for silence was over. 
 
ﬁThermal signature!ﬂ Simkins shouted, poi
nting at the opening. ﬁFlanks converge!ﬂ 
 
His two flanks moved in from opposite si
des, effectively surrounding the octagonal 
console. 
 
Simkins moved toward the opening. Still ten 
feet away, he coul
d see a light source 
within. ﬁLight inside the console!ﬂ he 
shouted, hoping the sound of his voice might 
convince Mr. Bellamy and Mr. Langdon to 
exit the cabinet with their hands up. 
 
Nothing happened. 
 
Fine, we™ll do this the other way.
 
 
As Simkins drew closer to the opening, he 
could hear an unexpected hum rumbling from 
within. It sounded like machinery. He pause
d, trying to imagine what could be making 
such a noise in such a small space. He inch
ed closer, now hearing voices over the sound 
of machinery. Then, just as he arrived at
 the opening, the lights inside went out. 
 
Thank you,
 he thought, adjusti
ng his night vision. 
Advantage, us.
 
 
Standing at the threshold, he peered through the opening. What lay beyond was 
unexpected. The console was less of a cabinet 
than a raised ceiling over a steep set of 
stairs that descended 
into a room below. The agent ai
med his weapon down the stairs and 
began descending. The hum of machin
ery grew louder with every step. 
 
What the hell is this place?
 
 
The room beneath the reading room was a sm
all, industrial-looking space. The hum he 
heard was indeed machinery, although he was not sure whether it was running because 
Bellamy and Langdon had activated it, or beca
use it ran around the clock. Either way, it 
clearly made no difference. The fugitives ha
d left their telltale heat signatures on the 
room™s lone exitŠa heavy st
eel door whose keypad showed 
four clear fingerprints 
glowing on the numbers. Around the door, sliver
s of glowing orange shone beneath the 
doorjamb, indicating that lights we
re illuminated on the other side. 
 
ﬁBlow the door,ﬂ Simkins said. ﬁThis was their escape route.ﬂ 
 
It took eight seconds to insert
 and detonate a sheet of Ke
y4. When the smoke cleared, the 
field-team agents found themselves peering 
into a strange underground world known here 
as ﬁthe stacks.ﬂ 
 
The Library of Congress had miles and mile
s of bookshelves, most of them underground. 
The endless rows of shelves looked like some
 kind of ﬁinfinityﬂ optical illusion created 
with mirrors. 
 
A sign announced 
TEMPERATURE-CONTROL
LED ENVIRONMENT
 
Keep this door closed at all times.
 
 
Simkins pushed through the mangled doors and 
felt cool air beyond. He couldn™t help but 
smile. 
Could this get any easier?
 Heat signatures in contro
lled environments showed up 
like solar flares, and already his goggles rev
ealed a glowing red smear on a banister up 
ahead, which Bellamy or Langdon had 
grabbed on to while running past. 
 
ﬁYou can run,ﬂ he whispered to himself, ﬁbut you can™t hide.ﬂ 
 
As Simkins and his team advanced into the m
aze of stacks, he realized the playing field 
was tipped so heavily in his favor that he 
would not even need his goggles to track his 
prey
.
 Under normal circumstances, this maze of
 stacks would have been a respectable 
hiding place, but the Library of Congress us
ed motion-activated lights to save energy, 
and the fugitives™ escape route was now 
lit up like a runway. A narrow strip of 
illumination stretched into the dist
ance, dodging and weaving as it went. 
 
All the men ripped off their goggles. Surging 
ahead on well-trained legs, the field team 
followed the trail of lights,
 zigging and zagging through a  
seemingly endless labyrinth of books. Soon Simkins began seeing lights flickering on in 
the darkness up ahead. 
We™re gaining.
 He pushed harder, faster, until he heard footsteps 
and labored breathing ahead. 
Then he saw a target. 
 
ﬁI™ve got visual!ﬂ he yelled. 
 
The lanky form of Warren Bellamy was apparently bringing up the rear. The primly 
dressed African American staggered thr
ough the stacks, obviously out of breath. 
It™s no 
use, old man.
 
 
ﬁStop right there, Mr. Bellamy!ﬂ Simkins yelled. 
 
Bellamy kept running, turning sharp corners,
 weaving through the rows of books. At 
every turn, the lights kept coming on over his head. 
 
As the team drew within twenty yards, th
ey shouted again to stop, but Bellamy ran on. 
 
ﬁTake him down!ﬂ Simkins commanded. 
 
The agent carrying the team™s nonlethal rifle 
raised it and fired. The projectile that 
launched down the aisle and wrapped itself around Bellamy™s legs was nicknamed Silly 
String, but there was nothing silly about it. 
A military technology invented at Sandia 
National Laboratories, this nonlethal ﬁincap
acitantﬂ was a thread 
of gooey polyurethane 
that turned rock hard on contact, creating a 
rigid web of plastic ac
ross the back of the 
fugitive™s knees. The effect on a running targ
et was that of jamming a stick into the 
spokes of a moving bike. The man™s legs se
ized midstride, and he pitched forward, 
crashing to the floor. Bellamy slid another te
n feet down a darkened aisle before coming 
to a stop, the lights above him f
lickering unceremoniously to life. 
 
ﬁI™ll deal with Bellamy,ﬂ Simkins shouted. 
ﬁYou keep going after Langdon! He must be 
up ahead someŠﬂ The team leader stopped, now 
seeing that the library stacks ahead of 
Bellamy were all pitch-black. Obviously, th
ere was no one else running in front of 
Bellamy. 
He™s alone?
 
 
Bellamy was still on his chest, breathing heav
ily, his legs and ankl
es all tangled with 
hardened plastic. The agent walked over a
nd used his foot to roll the old man over onto 
his back. 
 
ﬁWhere is he?!ﬂ the agent demanded. 
 
Bellamy™s lip was bleeding from the fall. ﬁWhere is 
who
?ﬂ 
 
Agent Simkins lifted his foot and placed his boo
t squarely on Bellamy™s pristine silk tie. 
Then he leaned in, applying some pressure. ﬁBelieve me, Mr. Bellamy, you do not want 
to play this game with me.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 59 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 felt like a corpse. 
 
He lay supine, hands folded on his chest, in 
total darkness, trapped in the most confined 
of spaces. Although Katherine lay nearby in
 a similar position near his head, Langdon 
could not see her. He had his eyes closed to
 prevent himself from catching even a fleeting 
glimpse of his frightening predicament. 
 
The space around him was small. 
 
Very
 small. 
 
Sixty seconds ago, with the double doors of 
the reading room crashing down, he and 
Katherine had followed Bellamy into the octa
gonal console, down a steep set of stairs, 
and into the unexpected space below. 
 
Langdon had realized at once where they were. 
The heart of the library™s circulation 
system.
 Resembling a small airport baggage distri
bution center, the circulation room had 
numerous conveyor belts that a
ngled off in different directions. Because the Library of 
Congress was housed in three separate build
ings, books requested in the reading room 
often had to be transported great distances
 by a system of conveyors through a web of 
underground tunnels. 
 
Bellamy immediately crossed the room to a 
steel door, where he in
serted his key card, 
typed a sequence of buttons, and pushed open the door. The space beyond was dark, but 
as the door opened, a span of motion-
sensor lights flickered to life. 
 
When Langdon saw what lay beyond, he realized he was looking at something few 
people ever saw. 
The Library of Congress stacks.
 He felt encouraged by Bellamy™s plan. 
What better place to hide 
than in a giant labyrinth?
 
 
Bellamy did not guide them into the stack
s, however. Instead, he propped the door open 
with a book and turned back to face them. ﬁI ha
d hoped to be able to explain a lot more to 
you, but we have no time.ﬂ He gave La
ngdon his key card. ﬁYou™ll need this.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re not coming with us?ﬂ Langdon asked. 
 
Bellamy shook his head. ﬁYou™ll never make 
it unless we split up. The most important 
thing is to keep that pyramid and capstone in safe hands.ﬂ 
 
Langdon saw no other way out exce
pt the stairs back up to 
the reading room. ﬁAnd where 
are 
you
 going?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll coax them into the stack
s away from you,ﬂ Bellamy sai
d. ﬁIt™s all I can do to help 
you escape.ﬂ 
 
Before Langdon could ask where he and Kath
erine were supposed to go, Bellamy was 
heaving a large crate of books o
ff one of the conveyors. ﬁLie on the belt,ﬂ Bellamy said. 
ﬁKeep your hands in.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared. 
You cannot be serious!
 The conveyor belt extended a short distance then 
disappeared into a dark hole in the wa
ll. The opening looked large enough to permit 
passage of a crate of books, but not much 
more. Langdon glanced back longingly at the 
stacks. 
 
ﬁForget it,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁThe motion-sensor
 lights will make it impossible to hide.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThermal signature!ﬂ a voice upsta
irs shouted. ﬁFlanks converge!ﬂ 
 
Katherine apparently had hear
d all she needed to hear. She climbed onto the conveyor 
belt with her head only a few feet from th
e opening in the wall. She crossed her hands 
over her chest like a mummy in a sarcophagus. 
 
Langdon stood frozen. 
 
ﬁRobert,ﬂ Bellamy urged, ﬁif you won™t do this for me, do it for Peter.ﬂ 
 
The voices upstairs sounded closer now. 
 
As if in a dream, Langdon moved to the conve
yor. He slung his daybag onto the belt and 
then climbed on, placing his head at Katherin
e™s feet. The hard rubber conveyor felt cold 
against his back. He stared at the ceiling a
nd felt like a hospital patient preparing for 
insertion headfirst into an MRI machine. 
 
ﬁKeep your phone on,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁSomeone 
will call soon . . . and offer help. Trust 
him.ﬂ 
 
Someone will call?
 Langdon knew that Bellamy had been trying to reach someone with 
no luck and had left a message earlier. A
nd only moments ago, as they hurried down the 
spiral staircase, Bellamy had tried one last
 time and gotten through, speaking very briefly 
in hushed tones and then hanging up. 
 
ﬁFollow the conveyor to the end,ﬂ Bellamy sa
id. ﬁAnd jump off quickly before you circle 
back. Use my key card to get out.ﬂ  
 
ﬁGet out of 
where
?!ﬂ Langdon demanded. 
 
But Bellamy was already pulling levers. All th
e different conveyors in
 the room hummed 
to life. Langdon felt himself jolt into mo
tion, and the ceiling began moving overhead. 
 
God save me.
 
 
As Langdon approached the opening in the 
wall, he looked back and saw Warren 
Bellamy race through the doorway into the st
acks, closing the door behind him. An 
instant later, Langdon slid into
 the darkness, swallowed up by the library . . . just as a 
glowing red laser dot came
 dancing down the stairs. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 60 
 
 
 
The underpaid
 female security guard from Preferred Security double-checked the 
Kalorama Heights address on her call sheet. 
This is it?
 The gated driveway before her 
belonged to one of the neighborhood™s largest 
and quietest estates, 
and so it seemed odd 
that 911 had just received 
an urgent call about it. 
 
As usual with unconfirmed call-ins, 911 had 
contacted the local alarm company before 
bothering the police. The guard often thought
 the alarm company™s mottoŠﬁYour first 
line of defenseﬂŠcould just as easily have 
been ﬁFalse alarms, pranks, lost pets, and 
complaints from wacky neighbors.ﬂ 
 
Tonight, as usual, the guard had arrived 
with no details about the specific concern. 
Above 
my pay grade.
 Her job was simply to show up with her yellow bubble light spinning, 
assess the property, and report anything unus
ual. Normally, something innocuous had 
tripped the house alarm, and she would 
use her override keys to reset it. 
This
 house, 
however, was silent. No alarm. From the road, everything looked dark and peaceful. 
 
The guard buzzed the intercom at the gate
, but got no answer. She typed her override 
code to open the gate and pulled into the dr
iveway. Leaving her engine running and her 
bubble light spinning, she walked up to the front
 door and rang the bell. No answer. She 
saw no lights and no movement. 
 
Reluctantly following procedure, she flicked on 
her flashlight to be
gin her trek around the 
house to check the doors and windows for signs 
of break-in. As she r
ounded the corner, a 
black stretch limousine drove past the house, 
slowing for a moment before continuing on. 
Rubbernecking neighbors.
 
 
Bit by bit, she made her way around the house,
 but saw nothing out of place. The house 
was bigger than she had imagined, and by the time she reached the backyard, she was 
shivering from the cold. Obviously there was nobody home. 
 
ﬁDispatch?ﬂ she called in on her radio. ﬁI™m 
on the Kalorama Heights call? Owners aren™t 
home. No signs of trouble. Finished the peri
meter check. No indication of an intruder. 
False alarm.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRoger that,ﬂ the dispatcher 
replied. ﬁHave a good night.ﬂ 
 
The guard put her radio back on her belt and be
gan retracing her steps,
 eager to get back 
to the warmth of her vehicle. As she did so, however, she spotted something she had 
missed earlierŠa tiny speck of bluish light on the back of the house. 
 
Puzzled, she walked over to it, now 
seeing the sourceŠa low transom window, 
apparently to the home™s basement. The glass of the window had been blacked out, 
coated on the inside with an opaque paint. 
Some kind of darkroom maybe?
 The bluish 
glow she had seen was emanating through 
a tiny spot on the wi
ndow where the black 
paint had started to peel. 
 
She crouched down, trying to peer through, but
 she couldn™t see much through the tiny 
opening. She tapped on the glass, wondering if
 maybe someone was working down there. 
 
ﬁHello?ﬂ she shouted. 
 
There was no answer, but as she knocked
 on the window, the paint chip suddenly 
detached and fell off, affording her a more co
mplete view. She leaned in, nearly pressing 
her face to the window as she scanned the basement. Instantly, she wished she hadn™t. 
 
What in the name of God?!
 
 
Transfixed, she remained crouched there for 
a moment, staring in abject horror at the 
scene before her. Finally, trembling, the guard groped for the radio on her belt. 
 
She never found it. 
 
A sizzling pair of Taser prongs slammed into 
the back of her neck, and a searing pain 
shot through her body. Her muscles seized, and 
she pitched forward, unable even to close 
her eyes before her face hit the cold ground. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 61 
 
 
 
Tonight was
 not the first time Warren Bellamy had 
been blindfolded. Like all of his 
Masonic brothers, he had worn the ritual
 ﬁhoodwinkﬂ during his ascent to the upper 
echelons of Masonry. That, however, had take
n place among trusted friends. Tonight was 
different. These rough-handed men had bound h
im, placed a bag on his head, and were 
now marching him through the library stacks. 
 
The agents had physically threatened Bella
my and demanded to know the whereabouts of 
Robert Langdon. Knowing his aging body couldn
™t take much punishment, Bellamy had 
told his lie quickly. 
 
ﬁLangdon never came down here with me!ﬂ he had said, gasping for air. ﬁI told him to go 
up to the balcony and hide behind the Moses st
atue, but I don™t know where he is now!ﬂ 
The story apparently had been convincing, because two of the agents had run off in 
pursuit. Now the remaining two agents were 
marching him in silence through the stacks. 
 
Bellamy™s only solace was in knowing La
ngdon and Katherine were whisking the 
pyramid off to safety. Soon Langdon would 
be contacted by a man who could offer 
sanctuary. 
Trust him.
 The man Bellamy had called knew a great deal about the Masonic 
Pyramid and the secret it hel
dŠthe location of a hidden spir
al staircase that led down 
into the earth to the hiding place of potent 
ancient wisdom buried long ago. Bellamy had 
finally gotten through to the man as they we
re escaping the reading room, and he felt 
confident that his short message
 would be understood perfectly. 
 
Now, as he moved in total darkness, Bella
my pictured the stone pyramid and golden 
capstone in Langdon™s bag. 
It has been many years since 
those two pieces were in the 
same room.
 
 
Bellamy would never forg
et that painful night. 
The first of many for Peter.
 Bellamy had 
been asked to come to the Solomon estate 
in Potomac for Zachary Solomon™s eighteenth 
birthday. Zachary, despite bei
ng a rebellious child, was a Solomon, which meant tonight, 
following family tradition, he would receive hi
s inheritance. Bellamy was one of Peter™s 
dearest friends and a trusted Masonic brothe
r, and therefore was asked to attend as a 
witness. But it was not only the transference 
of money that Bellamy had been asked to 
witness. There was far more than money at stake tonight. 
 
Bellamy had arrived early and waited, as 
requested, in Peter™s private study. The 
wonderful old room smelled of leather, wood fi
res, and loose-leaf tea. Warren was seated 
when Peter led his son, Zachary, into the r
oom. When the scrawny 
eighteen-year-old saw 
Bellamy, he frowned. ﬁWhat are you doing here?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBearing witness,ﬂ Bellamy offered. ﬁHappy birthday, Zachary.ﬂ 
 
The boy mumbled and looked away. 
 
ﬁSit down, Zach,ﬂ Peter said. 
 
Zachary sat in the solitary chair facing 
his father™s huge wooden desk. Solomon bolted 
the study door. Bellamy took a seat off to one side. 
 
Solomon addressed Zachary in a seri
ous tone. ﬁDo you know why you™re here?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI think so,ﬂ Zachary said. 
 
Solomon sighed deeply. ﬁI know you and I have 
not seen eye to eye for quite some time, 
Zach. I™ve done my best to be a good father and to prepare you for this moment.ﬂ 
 
Zachary said nothing. 
 
ﬁAs you know, every Solomon child, upon reaching 
adulthood, is presented with his or 
her birthrightŠa share of the Solomon fortuneŠwhich is intended to be a 
seed
 . . . a seed 
for you to nurture, make grow, and use to help nourish mankind.ﬂ 
 
Solomon walked to a vault in the wall, unl
ocked it, and removed a large black folder. 
ﬁSon, this portfolio contains everything you 
need to legally transfer your financial 
inheritance into your own name.ﬂ He laid it 
on the desk. ﬁThe aim is that you use this 
money to build a life of productiv
ity, prosperity, and philanthropy.ﬂ 
 
Zachary reached for the folder. ﬁThanks.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHold on,ﬂ his father said, putting his hand on 
the portfolio. ﬁThere™s something else I 
need to explain.ﬂ 
 
Zachary shot his father a contem
ptuous look and slumped back down. 
 
ﬁThere are aspects of the Solomon inheri
tance of which you are not yet aware.ﬂ His 
father was staring straight into Zachary™s 
eyes now. ﬁYou are my firstborn, Zachary, 
which means you are entitled to a choice.ﬂ 
 
The teenager sat up, looking intrigued. 
 
ﬁIt is a choice that may well determine the di
rection of your future, and so I urge you to 
ponder it carefully.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat choice?ﬂ 
 
His father took a deep breath. ﬁIt is the 
choice . . . between wealth or wisdom.ﬂ 
 
Zachary gave him a blank stare. ﬁW
ealth or wisdom? I don™t get it.ﬂ 
 
Solomon stood, walking again to the vault, 
where he pulled out a heavy stone pyramid 
with Masonic symbols carved into it. Peter he
aved the stone onto the desk beside the 
portfolio. ﬁThis pyramid was created long ago 
and has been entrusted to our family for 
generations.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA pyramid?ﬂ Zachary didn™t look very excited. 
 
ﬁSon, this pyramid is a map . . . a map that
 reveals the location 
of one of humankind™s 
greatest lost treasures. This map was create
d so that the treasure could one day be 
rediscovered.ﬂ Peter™s voice 
swelled now with pride. ﬁA
nd tonight, following tradition, I 
am able to offer it to you . . . under certain conditions.ﬂ 
 
Zachary eyed the pyramid suspiciously. ﬁWhat™s the treasure?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy could tell that this
 coarse question was not what Peter had hoped for. 
Nonetheless, his demeanor remained steady. 
 
ﬁZachary, it™s hard to explain wi
thout a lot of background. But th
is treasure . . . in essence 
. . . is something we call the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
Zachary laughed, apparently thi
nking his father was joking. 
 
Bellamy could see the melancholy
 growing now in Peter™s eyes. 
 
ﬁThis is very difficult for me to describe, 
Zach. Traditionally, by the time a Solomon is 
eighteen years of age, he is about to em
bark on his years of higher education inŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI told you!ﬂ Zachary fired back. ﬁ
I™m not interested in college!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t mean 
college,
ﬂ his father said, his voice still calm and quiet. ﬁI™m talking about 
the brotherhood of Freemasonry. I™m talki
ng about an education in the enduring 
mysteries of human science. If you had plans to join me within their ranks, you would be 
on the verge of receiving the education nece
ssary to understand th
e importance of your 
decision tonight.ﬂ 
 
Zachary rolled his eyes. ﬁSpare me the 
Masonic lecture again. I know I™m the first 
Solomon who doesn™t want to join. But so wh
at? Don™t you get it? I have no interest in 
playing dress-up with a bunch of old men!ﬂ 
 
His father was silent for a long time, and Be
llamy noticed the fine age lines that had 
started to appear around Pe
ter™s still-youthful eyes. 
 
ﬁYes, I get it,ﬂ Peter finally said. ﬁTimes
 are different now. I 
understand that Masonry 
probably appears strange to you, or maybe 
even boring. But I want you to know, that 
doorway will 
always
 be open for you should you change your mind.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDon™t hold your breath,ﬂ Zach grumbled. 
 
ﬁThat™s enough!ﬂ Peter snappe
d, standing up. ﬁI realize life 
has been a struggle for you, 
Zachary, but I am not your only guidepost. There are good men waiting for you, men 
who will welcome you within the Masonic fold and show you your true potential.ﬂ 
 
Zachary chuckled and glanced over at Bellamy. ﬁIs that why 
you™re
 here, Mr. Bellamy? 
So you Masons can gang up on me?ﬂ  
 
Bellamy said nothing, instead directing a re
spectful gaze back at Peter SolomonŠa 
reminder to Zachary of who he
ld the power in this room. 
 
Zachary turned back to his father. 
 
ﬁZach,ﬂ Peter said, ﬁwe™re getting nowhere . . 
. so let me just tell you this. Whether or not 
you comprehend the responsibility being offered 
to you tonight, it is my family obligation 
to present it.ﬂ He motioned to the pyramid. ﬁIt 
is a rare privilege to guard this pyramid. I 
urge you to consider this opportunity for 
a few days before making your decision.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOpportunity?ﬂ Zachary said. ﬁBabysitting a rock?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere are great mysteries in this world, Z
ach,ﬂ Peter said with a sigh. ﬁSecrets that 
transcend your wildest imagination. This pyram
id protects those secr
ets. And even more 
important, there will come a time, probably wi
thin your lifetime, when this pyramid will 
at last be deciphered and its secrets unearthed. It will be a moment of great human 
transformation . . . and you have a chance to pl
ay a role in that moment. I want you to 
consider it very carefully. Wealth is commonpl
ace, but wisdom is rare.ﬂ He motioned to 
the portfolio and then to the pyramid. ﬁI 
beg you to remember that wealth without 
wisdom can often end in disaster.ﬂ 
 
Zachary looked like he thought his father
 was insane. ﬁWhatever you say, Dad, but 
there™s no way I™m giving up my inheritance 
for this.ﬂ He gestured to the pyramid. 
 
Peter folded his hands before him. ﬁIf you 
choose to accept the responsibility, I will hold 
your money and the pyramid for you until 
you have successfully completed your 
education within the Masons. Th
is will take years, but you will emerge with the maturity 
to receive both your money 
and
 this pyramid. Wealth and wisdom. A potent 
combination.ﬂ 
 
Zachary shot up. ﬁJesus, Dad! You don™t give
 up, do you? Can™t you see that I don™t give 
a damn about the Masons or stone pyramids and ancient mysteries?ﬂ He reached down 
and scooped up the black portfolio, waving 
it in front of his father™s face. ﬁ
This
 is my 
birthright! The same birthright of the Solo
mons who came before me! I can™t believe 
you™d try to trick me out of my inheritan
ce with lame stories about ancient treasure 
maps!ﬂ He tucked the portfolio under his ar
m and marched past Be
llamy to the study™s 
patio door. 
 
ﬁZachary, wait!ﬂ His father rushed after hi
m as Zachary stalked out into the night. 
ﬁWhatever you do, you can never speak of the 
pyramid you have seen!ﬂ Peter Solomon™s 
voice cracked. ﬁNot to 
anyone
! Ever!ﬂ 
 
But Zachary ignored him, disappearing into the night. 
 
Peter Solomon™s gray eyes were filled with pain
 as he returned to his desk and sat heavily 
in his leather chair. After a 
long silence, he looked up at Bellamy and forced a sad smile. 
ﬁThat went well.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy sighed, sharing in Solomon™s pain. ﬁPet
er, I don™t mean to sound insensitive . . . 
but . . . do you trust him?ﬂ 
 
Solomon stared blankly into space. 
 
ﬁI mean . . .ﬂ Bellamy pressed, ﬁnot
 to say anything about the pyramid?ﬂ 
 
Solomon™s face was blank. ﬁI really don™t know
 what to say, Warren. I™m not sure I even 
know him anymore.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy rose and walked slowly back and forth before the large desk. ﬁPeter, you have 
followed your family duty, but now, considering 
what just happened, I think we need to 
take precautions. I should return the capstone
 to you so you can find a new home for it. 
Someone else should watch over it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhy?ﬂ Solomon asked. 
 
ﬁIf Zachary tells anyone about the pyramid . . 
. and mentions my being present tonight . . 
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe knows 
nothing
 of the capstone, and he™s too im
mature to know the pyramid has any 
significance. We don™t need a new home for it.
 I™ll keep the pyramid in my vault. And 
you will keep the capstone wherever you keep it. As we always have.ﬂ 
 
It was six years later, on Christmas Day, with
 the family still healing from Zachary™s 
death, that the enormous man claiming to ha
ve killed him in prison broke into the 
Solomon estate. The intruder ha
d come for the pyramid, but he had taken with him only 
Isabel Solomon™s life. 
 
Days later, Peter summoned Bellamy to hi
s office. He locked the door and took the 
pyramid out of his vault, setting it on the de
sk between them. ﬁI should have listened to 
you.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy knew Peter was racked with guilt over this. ﬁIt wouldn™t have mattered.ﬂ 
 
Solomon drew a tired breath. ﬁD
id you bring 
the capstone?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy pulled a small cube-shaped package 
from his pocket. The faded brown paper 
was tied with twine and bore a wax seal of 
Solomon™s ring. Bellamy laid the package on 
the desk, knowing the two halves of the Maso
nic Pyramid were clos
er together tonight 
than they should be. ﬁFind someone else to
 watch this. Don™t tell me who it is.ﬂ 
 
Solomon nodded. 
 
ﬁAnd I know where you can hide the pyramid,ﬂ 
Bellamy said. He told Solomon about the 
Capitol Building subbasement. ﬁThere™s 
no place in Washington more secure.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy recalled Solomon liking the idea right away because it felt symbolically apt to 
hide the pyramid in the symbolic heart of our nation. 
Typical Solomon,
 Bellamy had 
thought. 
The idealist even in a crisis.
 
 
Now, ten years later, as Bellamy was be
ing shoved blindly through the Library of 
Congress, he knew the crisis tonight was 
far from over. He also now knew whom 
Solomon had chosen to guard the capstone . . 
. and he prayed to God that Robert Langdon 
was up to the job. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 62 
 
 
 
I™m under
 Second Street.
 
 
Langdon™s eyes remained tightly shut as the conveyor rumbled through the darkness 
toward the Adams Building. He did his best no
t to picture the tons 
of earth overhead and 
the narrow tube through which he was now tr
aveling. He could hear Katherine breathing 
several yards ahead of him, but so
 far, she had not uttered a word. 
 
She™s in shock.
 Langdon was not looking forward to telling her about her brother™s 
severed hand. 
You have to, Robert. She needs to know.
 
 
ﬁKatherine?ﬂ Langdon finally said, without
 opening his eyes. ﬁAre you okay?ﬂ 
 
A tremulous, disembodied voice replied so
mewhere up ahead. ﬁRobert, the pyramid 
you™re carrying. It™s 
Peter™s, isn™t it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Langdon replied. 
 
A long silence followed. ﬁI th
ink . . . that pyramid is why my mother was murdered.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was well aware that Isabel Solomon ha
d been murdered ten years ago, but he 
didn™t know the details, and Peter had neve
r mentioned anything about a pyramid. ﬁWhat 
are you talking about?ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s voice filled with emotion as she 
recounted the harrowing events of that night, 
how the tattooed man had broken into their es
tate. ﬁIt was a long time ago, but I™ll never 
forget that he demanded a pyramid. He said 
he heard about the pyramid in prison, from 
my nephew, Zachary . . . right
 before he killed him.ﬂ 
 
Langdon listened in amazement. The tragedy within the Solomon family was almost 
beyond belief. Katherine continued, telling 
Langdon that she had always believed the 
intruder was killed that night . . . that is, 
until this same man had resurfaced today, posing 
as Peter™s psychiatrist and luring Katherine 
to his home. ﬁHe knew private things about 
my brother, my mother™s death, and even my 
work,
ﬂ she said anxiously, ﬁthings he could 
only have learned from my brother. And so I tr
usted him . . . and that™s how he got inside 
the Smithsonian Museum Support Center.ﬂ 
Katherine took a deep breath and told 
Langdon she was nearly certain the ma
n had destroyed her lab tonight. 
 
Langdon listened in utter shock. For several mome
nts, the two of them lay together in 
silence on the moving conveyor. Langdon knew 
he had an obligation to share with 
Katherine the rest of tonight™s terrible ne
ws. He began slowly, and as gently as he 
possibly could he told her how her brother ha
d entrusted him with a small package years 
earlier, how Langdon had been tricked into brin
ging this package to Washington tonight, 
and finally, about her brother™
s hand having been found in 
the Rotunda of the Capitol 
Building. 
 
Katherine™s reaction was deafening silence. 
 
Langdon could tell she was reeling, and he wish
ed he could reach out and comfort her, 
but lying end to end in the narrow blackne
ss made it impossible. ﬁPeter™s okay,ﬂ he 
whispered. ﬁHe™s alive, a
nd we™ll get him back.ﬂ Langdon tried to give her hope. 
ﬁKatherine, his captor 
promised
 me your brother would be retu
rned alive . . . as long as I 
decipher the pyramid for him.ﬂ 
 
Still Katherine said nothing. 
 
Langdon kept talking. He told her about the st
one pyramid, its Masonic cipher, the sealed 
capstone, and, of course, about Bellamy™s clai
ms that this pyramid was in fact the 
Masonic Pyramid of legend . . . a map that 
revealed the hiding place of a long spiral 
staircase that led deep into the earth . . 
. down hundreds of feet to a mystical ancient 
treasure that had been buri
ed in Washington long ago. 
 
Katherine finally spoke, but
 her voice was flat and em
otionless. ﬁRobert, open your 
eyes.ﬂ 
 
Open my eyes?
 Langdon had no desire to have even th
e slightest glimpse of how cramped 
this space really was. 
 
ﬁRobert!ﬂ Katherine demanded, urgently now. ﬁOpen your eyes! We™re here!ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s eyes flew open as his body emerged 
through an opening similar to the one it 
had entered at the other end. Katherine was 
already climbing off the conveyor belt. She 
lifted his daybag off the belt as Langdon swung 
his legs over the edge and jumped down 
onto the tile floor just in time, before the c
onveyor turned the corner and headed back the 
way it came. The space around them was a circulation room much like the one they had 
come from in the other building. A small sign read 
ADAMS BUILDING: 
CIRCULATION ROOM 3.
 
 
Langdon felt like he had just emerged from some kind of subterranean  
birth canal. 
Born again.
 He turned immediately to Katherine. ﬁAre you okay?ﬂ 
 
Her eyes were red, and she had obviously b
een crying, but she nodded with a resolute 
stoicism. She picked up Langdon™
s daybag and carried it across the room without a word, 
setting it on a cluttered desk. She lit the 
desk™s halogen clamp lamp, unzipped the bag, 
folded down the sides, and peered inside. 
 
The granite pyramid looked almost austere in
 the clean halogen light. Katherine ran her 
fingers over the engraved Masonic cipher, 
and Langdon sensed deep emotion churning 
within her. Slowly, she reach
ed into the daybag and pulled out the cube-shaped package. 
She held it under the light, examining it closely. 
 
ﬁAs you can see,ﬂ Langdon quietly said, ﬁthe wa
x seal is embossed w
ith Peter™s Masonic 
ring. He said this ring was used to seal
 the package more than a century ago.ﬂ 
 
Katherine said nothing. 
 
ﬁWhen your brother entrusted the package to 
me,ﬂ Langdon told her, ﬁhe said it would 
give me the power to create order out of chao
s. I™m not entirely sure what that means, but 
I™ve got to assume the capstone reveals some
thing important, because Peter was insistent 
that it not fall into the wrong 
hands. Mr. Bellamy just told 
me the same thing, urging me 
to hide the pyramid and not 
let anyone open the package.ﬂ 
 
Katherine turned now, looking 
angry. ﬁBellamy told you 
not
 to open the package?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes. He was adamant.ﬂ 
 
Katherine looked incredulous. 
ﬁBut you said this capstone
 is the only way we can 
decipher the pyramid, right?ﬂ 
 
ﬁProbably, yes.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s voice was rising now. ﬁAnd you said
 deciphering the pyramid is what you 
were told to do. It™s the 
only
 way we can get Peter back, right?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. 
 
ﬁThen, Robert, why wouldn™t we open the pack
age and decipher this
 thing right now?!ﬂ 
 
Langdon didn™t know how to respond. ﬁKatherine
, I had the same exact reaction, and yet 
Bellamy told me that keeping this pyramid™s secret intact was more important than 
anything . . . including your brother™s life.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s pretty features hardened, and she tu
cked a wisp of hair behind her ears. When 
she spoke, her voice was 
resolved. ﬁThis stone  
pyramid, whatever it is, has cost me my en
tire family. First my nephew, Zachary, then 
my mother, and now my brother.And let™s face 
it, Robert, if you ha
dn™t called tonight to 
warn 
me
 . . .ﬂ 
 
Langdon could feel himself trapped between Ka
therine™s logic and Bellamy™s steadfast 
urging. 
 
ﬁI may be a scientist,ﬂ she said, ﬁbut I al
so come from a family of well-known Masons. 
Believe me, I™ve heard all the stories about th
e Masonic Pyramid and its promise of some 
great treasure that will enlighten mankind. Hones
tly, I find it hard to imagine such a thing 
exists. However, if it 
does
 exist . . . perhaps it™s time to 
unveil it.ﬂ Katherine slid a finger 
beneath the old twine on the package. 
 
Langdon jumped. ﬁKatherine, no! Wait!ﬂ 
 
She paused, but her finger remained beneath 
the string. ﬁRobert, I™m not going to let my 
brother die for this. Whatever this capstone
 says . . . whatever lost treasures this 
engraving might reveal . . . 
those secrets end tonight.ﬂ 
 
With that, Katherine yanked defiantly on the 
twine, and the brittle wax seal exploded. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 63 
 
 
 
In a quiet
 neighborhood just west of Embassy 
Row in Washington, there exists a 
medieval-style walled garden whose roses, it
 is said, spring from 
twelfth-century plants. 
The garden™s Carderock gazeboŠknown as 
Shadow HouseŠsits elegantly amid 
meandering pathways of stones dug from 
George Washington™s private quarry. 
 
Tonight the silence of the 
gardens was broken by a young man who rushed through the 
wooden gate, shouting as he came. 
 
ﬁHello?ﬂ he called out, straining to se
e in the moonlight. ﬁAre you in here?ﬂ 
 
The voice that replied was frail, barely audibl
e. ﬁIn the gazebo . . . just taking some air.ﬂ 
 
The young man found his withered superior seat
ed on the stone bench beneath a blanket. 
The hunched old man was tiny, with elfin feat
ures. The years had bent him in two and 
stolen his eyesight, but his soul re
mained a force to be reckoned with. 
 
Catching his breath, the young man told him, ﬁI ju
st . . . took a call . . . from your friend . 
. . Warren Bellamy.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOh?ﬂ The old man perked up. ﬁAbout what?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe didn™t say, but he sounded like he was in a big hurry. He told me he left you a 
message on your voice mail, which you n
eed to listen to right away.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s all he said?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot quite.ﬂ The young man paused. ﬁHe told me to ask you a question.ﬂ 
A very strange 
question.
 ﬁHe said he needed your
 response right away.ﬂ 
 
The old man leaned closer. ﬁWhat question?ﬂ 
 
As the young man spoke Mr. Bellamy™s question, 
the pall that crossed the old man™s face 
was visible even in the moon
light. Immediately, he thre
w off his blanket and began 
struggling to his feet. 
 
ﬁPlease help me inside. Right away.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 64 
 
 
 
No more secrets,
 thought Katherine Solomon. 
 
On the table in front of her, the wax seal th
at had been intact for generations now lay in 
pieces. She finished removing the faded br
own paper from her brother™s precious 
package. Beside her, Langdon looked decidedly uneasy. 
 
From within the paper, Kath
erine extracted a small box made
 of gray stone. Resembling a 
polished granite cube, the box had no hinges, 
no latch, and no appare
nt way inside. It 
reminded Katherine of a Chinese puzzle box. 
 
ﬁIt looks like a solid block,ﬂ she said, runni
ng her fingers over the edges. ﬁAre you sure 
the X-ray showed it was hollow? With a capstone inside?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt did,ﬂ Langdon said, moving next to Kather
ine and scrutinizing th
e mysterious box. He 
and Katherine peered at the box from diffe
rent angles, attempting to find a way in. 
 
ﬁGot it,ﬂ Katherine said as 
her fingernail located the hi
dden slit along one of the box™s 
top edges. She set the box down on the desk 
and then carefully pried open the lid, which 
rose smoothly, like the top 
of a fine jewelry box. 
 
When the lid fell back, Langdon and Katherine bot
h drew audible breaths. The interior of 
the box seemed to be glowing. The inside wa
s shining with an almost supernatural 
effulgence. Katherine had never seen a piece of
 gold this large, and it took her an instant 
to realize that the precious metal was simply reflecting the radiance of the desk lamp. 
 
ﬁIt™s spectacular,ﬂ she whispered. Despite bei
ng sealed in a dark stone cube for over a 
century, the capstone had not fa
ded or tarnished in any way. 
Gold resists the entropic 
laws of decay; that™s one of the re
asons the ancients c
onsidered it magical.
 Katherine felt 
her pulse quicken as she leaned forward, peering down over the small golden point. 
ﬁThere™s an inscription.ﬂ 
 
Langdon moved closer, their shoulders now touching. His blue eyes flashed with 
curiosity. He had told Katherine about 
the ancient Greek practice of creating a 
symbolonŠa code broken into partsŠand how
 this capstone, long separated from the 
pyramid itself, would hold the key to decipheri
ng the pyramid. Allege
dly, this inscription, 
whatever it said, would bri
ng order from this chaos. 
 
Katherine held the little box 
up to the light and peered st
raight down over the capstone. 
 
Though small, the inscription was perfectly vi
sibleŠa small bit of elegantly engraved 
text on the face of one side. Kather
ine read the six simple words. 
 
Then she read them again. 
 
ﬁNo!ﬂ
 she declared. ﬁThat 
can™t
 be what it says!ﬂ 
 
Across the street, Director Sato hurried up 
the long walkway outside the Capitol Building 
toward her rendezvous point on First Street. 
The update from her field team had been 
unacceptable. No Langdon. No pyramid. No cap
stone. Bellamy was in custody, but he 
was not telling them the truth. At least not yet. 
 
I™ll make him talk.
 
 
She glanced back over her shoulder at one of
 Washington™s newest vistasŠthe Capitol 
Dome framed above the new visitor center. 
The illuminated dome only accentuated the 
significance of what was tr
uly at stake tonight. 
Dangerous times.
 
 
Sato was relieved to hear her cell phone 
ring and see her analyst™s ID on the screen. 
 
ﬁNola,ﬂ Sato answered. ﬁWhat have you got?ﬂ 
 
Nola Kaye gave her the bad news. The X-ray 
of the capstone™s insc
ription was too faint 
to read, and the image-enhanc
ing filters had not helped. 
Shit
. Sato chewed at her lip. 
ﬁHow about the sixt
een-letter grid?ﬂ  
 
ﬁI™m still trying,ﬂ Nola said, ﬁbut so far I™v
e found no secondary encryption scheme that™s 
applicable. I™ve got a computer
 reshuffling the letters in th
e grid and looking for anything 
identifiable, but there are over 
twenty trillion possibilities.ﬂ 
 
ﬁStay on it. Let me know.ﬂ Sato hung up, sc
owling. Her hopes of
 deciphering the 
pyramid using only a photograph and X-ray were fading fast. 
I need that pyramid and 
capstone . . . and I™m 
running out of time.
 
 
Sato arrived at First Street just as a black
 Escalade SUV with dark windows roared across 
the double yellow and skidded to a stop in front
 of her at their rendezvous point. A lone 
agent got out. 
 
ﬁAny word yet on Langdon?ﬂ Sato demanded. 
 
ﬁConfidence is high,ﬂ the man said, emotionle
ss. ﬁBackup just arrive
d. All library exits 
are surrounded. We even have air support comi
ng in. We™ll flush him with tear gas, and 
he™ll have nowhere to run.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd Bellamy?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTied up in the backseat.ﬂ 
 
Good.
 Her shoulder was still smarting. 
 
The agent handed Sato a plastic Ziploc ba
g containing cell phone, keys, and wallet. 
ﬁBellamy™s effects.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNothing else?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, ma™am. The pyramid and package must still be with Langdon.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁBellamy knows plenty
 he™s not telling. I™d 
like to question him 
personally.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am. To Langley, then?ﬂ 
 
Sato took a deep breath and paced a moment 
beside the SUV. Strict protocols governed 
the interrogation of U.S. civi
lians, and questioning Bellamy 
was highly illegal unless it 
was done at Langley on video with witnesses,
 attorneys, blah, blah, blah . . . ﬁNot 
Langley,ﬂ she said, trying to
 think of somewhere closer. 
And more private.
 
 
The agent said nothing, standing at attention 
beside the idling SUV, waiting for orders. 
 
Sato lit a cigarette, took a long drag, and g
azed down at the Ziploc bag of Bellamy™s 
items. His key ring, she had noticed, include
d an electronic fob 
adorned with four 
lettersŠ
USBG.
 Sato knew, of course, which govern
ment building this fob accessed. The 
building was very close and, at
 this hour, very private. 
 
She smiled and pocketed the fob. 
Perfect.
 
 
When she told the agent where she wanted to
 take Bellamy, she expected the man to look 
surprised, but he simply nodded and opened th
e passenger door for her, his cold stare 
revealing nothing. 
 
Sato loved professionals. 
 
Langdon stood in the basement of the Adams Building and stared in disbelief at the 
elegantly inscribed words on th
e face of the golden capstone. 
 
That™s all it says?
 
 
Beside him, Katherine held the capstone unde
r the light and shook her head. ﬁThere™s got 
to be more,ﬂ she insisted, sounding cheated. ﬁ
This
 is what my brother has been protecting 
all these years?ﬂ 
 
Langdon had to admit he was mystified. Accord
ing to Peter and Bellamy, this capstone 
was supposed to help them decipher the stone
 pyramid. In light of those claims, Langdon 
had expected something illuminating and helpful. 
More like obvious and useless.
 Once 
again, he read the six words delicately
 inscribed on the face of the capstone. 
The 
 
secret hides 
 
within The Order
 
 
 
The secret hides within The Order?
 
 
At first glance, the inscripti
on appeared to be stating the 
obviousŠthat the letters on the 
pyramid were out of ﬁorderﬂ a
nd that their secret lay in 
finding their proper sequence. 
This reading, however, in addition to bei
ng self-evident, seemed
 unlikely for another 
reason. ﬁThe words 
the
 and 
order
 are capitalized,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
Katherine nodded blankly. ﬁI saw that.ﬂ 
 
The secret hides within The Order.
 Langdon could think of only 
one logical implication. 
ﬁ ‚The Order™ must be referencing 
the Masonic Order.
ﬂ 
 
ﬁI agree,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁbut it™s
 still no help. It tells us nothing.ﬂ 
 
Langdon had to concur. After all, the entire
 story of the Masonic Pyramid revolved 
around a secret hidden within the Masonic Order. 
 
ﬁRobert, didn™t my brother tell you this
 capstone would give you power to see 
order
 
where others saw only 
chaos
?ﬂ 
 
He nodded in frustration. For the sec
ond time tonight, Robert Langdon was feeling 
unworthy. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 65 
 
 
 
Once Mal™akh
 had finished dealing with his unexpect
ed visitorŠa female security guard 
from Preferred SecurityŠhe fixed the 
paint on the window through which she had 
glimpsed his sacred work space. 
 
Now, ascending out of the soft blue haze of
 the basement, he emerged through a hidden 
doorway into his living room. Inside, he paus
ed, admiring his spectac
ular painting of the 
Three Graces and savoring the familiar smells and sounds of his home. 
 
Soon I will be leaving forever.
 Mal™akh knew that after toni
ght he would be unable to 
return to this place. 
After tonight,
 he thought, smiling, 
I will have no
 need 
for this place.
 
 
He wondered if Robert Langdon yet understood the 
true power of the pyramid . . . or the 
importance of the role for which fate had chosen him. 
Langdon has yet to call me,
 
Mal™akh thought, after double-
checking for messages on his disposable phone. It was 
now 10:02 P.M. 
He has less than two hours.
 
 
Mal™akh went upstairs to his It
alian-marble bathroom and tu
rned on the steam shower to 
let it heat up. Methodically, he 
stripped off his clothes, eager
 to begin his cleansing ritual. 
 
He drank two glasses of wate
r to calm his starving stomach. Then he walked to the full-
length mirror and studied his naked body. His tw
o days of fasting had accentuated his 
musculature, and he could not help bu
t admire that which he had become. 
By dawn, I will 
be so much more.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 66 
 
 
 
ﬁWe should
 get out of here,ﬂ Langdon said to 
Katherine. ﬁIt™s only a matter of time 
before they figure out where we are.ﬂ He hoped Bellamy had managed to escape. 
 
Katherine still seemed fixated on the gold 
capstone, looking incredulous that the 
inscription was so unhelpful. She had taken 
the capstone out of the box, examined every 
side, and was now carefully 
putting it back in the box. 
 
The secret hides within The Order,
 Langdon thought. 
Big help.
 
 
Langdon found himself wondering now if perhaps 
Peter had been misinformed about the 
contents of the box. This pyramid and capstone
 had been created long before Peter was 
born, and Peter was simply doing as his forefath
ers had told him, keeping a secret that 
was probably as much a mystery to him as it was to Langdon and Katherine. 
 
What did I expect?
 Langdon wondered. The more he lear
ned tonight about the Legend of 
the Masonic Pyramid, the less plausible it all seemed. 
I™m searching for a hidden spiral 
staircase covered by a huge stone?
 Something told Langdon he was chasing shadows. 
Nonetheless, deciphering this pyramid s
eemed his best chance at saving Peter. 
 
ﬁRobert, does the year 1514 
mean anything to you?ﬂ 
 
Fifteen-fourteen?
 The question seemed apropos
 of nothing. Langdon shrugged. ﬁNo. 
Why?ﬂ 
 
Katherine handed him the stone box. ﬁLook. The box is dated. Have a look under the 
light.ﬂ 
 
Langdon took a seat at the desk and studi
ed the cube-shaped box beneath the light. 
Katherine put a soft hand on his shoulder, l
eaning in to point out the tiny text she had 
found carved on the exterior of the box, n
ear the bottom corner of one side. 
 
ﬁFifteen-fourteen A.D.,ﬂ she 
said, pointing into the box.  
 
Sure enough, the carving depicted the nu
mber 1514, followed by an unusual stylization 
of the letters 
A
 and 
D.
 
 
 
 
 
 
ﬁThis date,ﬂ Katherine was saying, sounding s
uddenly hopeful, ﬁmaybe it™s the link we™re 
missing? This dated cube looks a lot like a 
Masonic cornerstone, so maybe it™s pointing 
to a 
real
 cornerstone? Maybe to a building built in 1514 A.D.?ﬂ 
 
Langdon barely heard her. 
 
Fifteen-fourteen A.D. is not a date.
 
 
The symbol 
, as any scholar of medieval ar
t would recognize, was a well-known 
symbatureŠa symbol used in place of a 
signature. Many of the early philosophers, 
artists, and authors signed their work with 
their own unique symbol or monogram rather 
than their name. This practice added a mysteri
ous allure to their wo
rk and also protected 
them from persecution should their writings or
 artwork be deemed counterestablishment. 
 
In the case of this symbature, the letters 
A.D.
 did not stand for 
Anno Domini
 . . . they 
were German for something else entirely. 
 
Langdon instantly saw all the pieces fall into pl
ace. Within seconds, he was certain he 
knew exactly how to decipher the pyramid. ﬁK
atherine, you did it,ﬂ he said, packing up. 
ﬁThat™s all we needed. Let™
s go. I™ll explain on the way.ﬂ 
 
Katherine looked amazed. ﬁThe
 date 1514 A.D. actually 
means
 something to you?ﬂ 
 
Langdon winked at her and headed for the door. 
ﬁA.D. isn™t a date, Katherine. It™s a 
person.
ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 67 
 
 
 
West of
 Embassy Row, all was silent again insi
de the walled garden with its twelfth-
century roses and Shadow House gazebo. On th
e other side of an entry road, the young 
man was helping his hunched superior
 walk across an expansive lawn. 
 
He™s letting me guide him?
 
 
Normally, the blind old man refused help, pr
eferring to navigate by memory alone while 
on the grounds of his sanctuary. Tonight, howev
er, he was apparently in a hurry to get 
inside and return Warren Bellamy™s phone call. 
 
ﬁThank you,ﬂ the old man said as they entered 
the building that held 
his private study. ﬁI 
can find my way from here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSir, I would be happy to stay and helpŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s all for tonight,ﬂ he sa
id, letting go of his helper™s 
arm and shuffling hurriedly off 
into the darkness. ﬁGood night.ﬂ 
 
The young man exited the building and walked b
ack across the great lawn to his modest 
dwelling on the grounds. By the time he entere
d his flat, he could 
feel his curiosity 
gnawing at him. The old man clearly had 
been upset by the question posed by Mr. 
Bellamy . . . and yet the question had 
seemed strange, almost meaningless. 
 
Is there no help for the widow™s son?
 
 
In his wildest imagination, he 
could not guess what this coul
d mean. Puzzled, he went to 
his computer and typed in a search for this precise phrase. 
 
To his great surprise, page 
after page of references a
ppeared, all citing this exact 
question. He read the information in wonderm
ent. It seemed Warren Bellamy was not the 
first person in history to ask 
this strange question. These 
same words had been uttered 
centuries ago . . . by King Solomon as he mourned a murdered friend. The question was 
allegedly still spoken today by Masons, who us
ed it as a kind of encoded cry for help. 
Warren Bellamy, it seemed, was sending a 
distress call to a fellow Mason. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 68 
 
 
 
Albrecht Dürer?
 
 
Katherine was trying to put the pieces togeth
er as she hurried w
ith Langdon through the 
basement of the Adams Building. 
A.D. stands for Albrecht Dürer?
 The famous sixteenth-
century German engraver and painter was 
one of her brother™s favorite artists, and 
Katherine was vaguely familiar with his work. Even so, she could not imagine how Dürer 
would be any help to them in this case. 
For one thing, he™s been dead more than four 
hundred years.
 
 
ﬁDürer is symbolically pe
rfect,ﬂ Langdon was saying as 
they followed the trail of 
illuminated 
EXIT
 signs. ﬁHe was the ultimate Renaissance mindŠartist, philosopher, 
alchemist, 
and
 a lifelong student of the Ancient Mysteries. To this day, nobody fully 
understands the messages hidden in Dürer™s art.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat may be true,ﬂ she said. ﬁBut how does ‚1514 Albrecht Dürer™ explain how to 
decipher the pyramid?ﬂ They reached a locked door, and Langdon used Bellamy™s key 
card to get through. 
 
ﬁThe number 1514,ﬂ Langdon said as they hurried
 up the stairs, ﬁis pointing us to a very 
specific piece of Dürer™s work.ﬂ They came into a huge corridor. Langdon glanced 
around and then pointed left. ﬁThis way.ﬂ Th
ey moved quickly again. ﬁAlbrecht Dürer 
actually 
hid
 the number 1514 in his most 
mysterious piece of artŠ
Melencolia I
Šwhich 
he completed in the year 1514. It™s consid
ered the seminal work of the Northern 
European Renaissance.ﬂ 
 
Peter had once shown Katherine 
Melencolia I
 in an old book on ancient mysticism, but 
she didn™t recall any hidden number 1514. 
 
ﬁAs you may know,ﬂ Langdon said, sounding excited, ﬁ
Melencolia I
 depicts mankind™s 
struggle to comprehend the Ancient Mysteries. The symbolism in 
Melencolia I
 is so 
complex it makes Leonardo da Vinci look overt.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stopped abruptly a
nd looked at Langdon. ﬁRobert, 
Melencolia I
 is here in 
Washington. It hangs in
 the National Gallery.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ he said with a smile, ﬁand something tells me 
that™s
 not a coincidence. The gallery 
is closed at this hour, but
 I know the curator andŠﬂ 
 
ﬁForget it, Robert, I know what happens when
 you go to museums.ﬂ Katherine headed off 
into a nearby alcove, where she saw a desk with a computer. 
 
Langdon followed, looking unhappy. 
 
ﬁLet™s do this the easier way.ﬂ It seemed
 Professor Langdon, the art connoisseur, was 
having an ethical dilemma about using the In
ternet when an original was so nearby. 
Katherine stepped behind the desk and powered up the computer. When the machine 
finally came to life, she r
ealized she had another probl
em. ﬁThere™s no icon for a 
browser.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s an internal library network.ﬂ Langdon pointed to an icon on the desktop. ﬁTry that.ﬂ 
 
Katherine clicked on the icon marked 
DIGITAL COLLECTIONS
. The computer 
accessed a new screen, and Langdon pointed ag
ain. Katherine clicked on his choice of 
icon: 
FINE PRINTS COLLECTION
. The screen refreshed. 
FINE PRINTS: 
SEARCH
. 
 
ﬁType in ‚Albrecht Dürer.™ ﬂ 
 
Katherine entered the name and then clicked 
the search key. Within seconds, the screen 
began displaying a series of thumbnail images. All of the images looke
d to be similar in 
styleŠintricate black-and-white engravings. Dürer had apparently done
 dozens of similar 
engravings. 
 
Katherine scanned the alphabe
tical list of his artwork. 
 
Adam and Eve 
 
Betrayal of Christ 
 
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse 
 
Great Passion 
 
Last Supper
 
 
 
Seeing all the biblical titles
, Katherine recalled that Dürer practiced something called 
Mystic ChristianityŠa fusion of early Christianity, alchemy, astrology, and science. 
 
Science . . .
 
 
The image of her lab in flames rushed th
rough her mind. She could barely process the 
long-term ramifications, but fo
r the moment, her thoughts turned
 to her assi
stant, Trish. 
I 
hope she made it out.
 
 
Langdon was saying something about Dürer™s vers
ion of the Last Supper, but Katherine 
was barely listening. She had just seen the link for 
Melencolia I.
 
 
She clicked the mouse, and the page 
refreshed with general information. 
Melencolia I,
 1514
 
Albrecht Dürer
 
(engraving on laid paper)
 
Rosenwald Collection
 
National Gallery of Art
 
Washington, D.C.
 
 
 
When she scrolled down, a high-res digital im
age of Dürer™s masterpiece appeared in all 
its glory. 
 
Katherine stared in bewilderment, havi
ng forgotten just how strange it was. 
 
Langdon gave an understanding chuckle. ﬁAs I said, it™s cryptic.ﬂ 
 
Melencolia I
 consisted of a brooding figure with gian
t wings, seated in front of a stone 
building, surrounded by the most disparate and 
bizarre collection of objects imaginableŠ
measuring scales, an emaciated dog, carpenter™s
 tools, an hourglass, various geometric 
solids, a hanging bell, a 
putto
, a blade, a ladder. 
 
Katherine vaguely recalled her brother te
lling her that the winged figure was a 
representation of ﬁhuman geniusﬂŠa great thinker with chin
 in hand, looking depressed, 
still unable to achieve enlightenment. The geni
us is surrounded with al
l of the symbols of 
his human intellectŠobjects of science, 
math, philosophy, nature, geometry, even 
carpentryŠand yet is still unable to c
limb the ladder to true enlightenment. 
Even the 
human genius has difficulty comp
rehending the Ancient Mysteries.
 
 
ﬁSymbolically,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁthis represen
ts mankind™s failed attempt to transform 
human
 intellect into 
god
like power. In alchemical terms, it 
represents our inability to turn 
lead into gold.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot a particularly encouraging message,ﬂ 
Katherine agreed. ﬁSo how does it help us?ﬂ 
She did not see the hidden number 
1514 that Langdon was talking about. 
 
ﬁOrder from chaos,ﬂ Langdon said, flashing 
a lopsided grin. ﬁJust as your brother 
promised.ﬂ He reached in his pocket and pulle
d out the grid of letters he had written 
earlier from the Masonic cipher.
 ﬁRight now, this grid is 
meaningless.ﬂ He spread the 
paper out on the desk. 
 
 
 
 
 
Katherine eyed the grid. 
Definitely meaningless.
 
 
ﬁBut Dürer will transform it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd how might he do that?ﬂ 
 
ﬁLinguistic alchemy.ﬂ Langdon motioned to 
the computer screen. ﬁLook carefully. 
Hidden in this masterpiece is something that will make sense of our sixteen letters.ﬂ He 
waited. ﬁDo you see it yet? Look for the number 1514.ﬂ 
 
Katherine was in no mood to play classroom
. ﬁRobert, I see nothi
ngŠan orb, a ladder, a 
knife, a polyhedron, a scale? I give up.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLook! There in the background. Carved into th
at building behind the angel? Beneath the 
bell? Dürer engraved a square
 that is full of numbers.ﬂ 
 
Katherine now saw the square that 
contained numbers, among them 1514. 
 
ﬁKatherine, that square is the 
key to deciphering the pyramid!ﬂ  
 
She shot him a surprised look. ﬁThat™s not just 
any
 square,ﬂ Langdon said, grinning.  
 
ﬁThat, Ms. Solomon, is a 
magic
 square.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 69 
 
 
 
Where the
 hell are they taking me?
 
 
Bellamy was still blindfolded in
 the back of an SUV. Afte
r a short stop somewhere close 
to the Library of Congress, the vehicle had 
continued on . . . but only for a minute. Now 
the SUV had stopped again, having ag
ain traveled only about a block. 
 
Bellamy heard muffled voices talking.  
 
ﬁSorry . . . impossible . . .ﬂ an authoritative vo
ice was saying. ﬁ . . . closed at this hour . . 
.ﬂ 
 
The man driving the SUV replied with equal 
authority. ﬁCIA invest
igation . . . national 
security . . .ﬂ Apparently the exchange of 
words and IDs was persuasive, because the tone 
shifted immediately. 
 
ﬁYes, of course . . . service entrance . . .ﬂ
 There was the loud grinding of what sounded 
like a garage door, and as it opened, th
e voice added, ﬁShall I accompany you? Once 
you™re inside, you won™t be
 able to get throughŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo. We have access already.ﬂ 
 
If the guard was surprised, it was too late. 
The SUV was moving agai
n. It advanced about 
fifty yards and then came to a stop. The hea
vy door rumbled closed again behind them. 
 
Silence. 
 
Bellamy realized he was trembling. 
 
With a bang, the SUV™s rear hatch flew open. 
Bellamy felt a sharp pain in his shoulders 
as someone dragged him out by his arms, then
 lifted him to his feet. Without a word, a 
powerful force led him across a wide expans
e of pavement. There was a strange, earthy 
smell here that he could not place. There we
re footsteps of someone else walking with 
them, but whoever it was had yet to speak. 
 
They stopped at a door, and Bellamy heard an
 electronic ping. The door clicked open. 
Bellamy was manhandled through several corridor
s and could not help but notice that the 
air was warmer and more humid. 
An indoor pool, maybe? No.
 The smell in the air was 
not chlorine . . . it was far more earthy and primal. 
 
Where the hell are we?!
 Bellamy knew he could not be more
 than a block or two from the 
Capitol Building. Again they stopped, and again 
he heard the electronic beep of a security 
door. This one slid open with a hiss. As th
ey pushed him through, the smell that hit him 
was unmistakable. 
 
Bellamy now realized where they were. 
My God!
 He came here often, although never 
through the service entrance. This magnifi
cent glass building was only three hundred 
yards from the Capitol Building and was t
echnically part of the Capitol Complex. 
I run 
this place!
 Bellamy now realized it was his own 
key fob that was giving them access. 
 
Powerful arms pushed him through the doorwa
y, leading him down a familiar, winding 
walkway. The heavy, damp warmth of this pla
ce usually felt comfor
ting to him. Tonight, 
he was sweating. 
 
What are we doing here?!
 
 
Bellamy was halted suddenly and seated 
on a bench. The man with the muscles unhooked 
his handcuffs only long enough to reaffix 
them to the bench behind his back. 
 
ﬁWhat do you want from me?ﬂ Bellam
y demanded, heart pounding wildly.  
 
The only response he received was the sound of boots walking off and the glass door 
sliding shut. 
 
Then silence. 
 
Dead silence. 
 
They™re just going to leave me here?
 Bellamy was sweating more heavily now as he 
struggled to release his hands. 
I can™t even take off my blindfold?
 
 
ﬁHelp!ﬂ he shouted. ﬁAnybody!ﬂ  
 
Even as he called out in panic, Bellam
y knew nobody was going to hear him. This 
massive glass roomŠknown as the JungleŠwas 
entirely airtight when the doors were 
closed. 
 
They left me in the Jungle,
 he thought. 
Nobody will find me until morning.
 
 
Then he heard it. 
 
The sound was barely audible, 
but it terrified Bellamy like no sound he had ever heard in 
his life. 
Something breathing. Very close.
 
 
He was not alone on the bench.  
 
The sudden hiss of a sulfur match sizzled so cl
ose to his face that he could feel the heat. 
Bellamy recoiled, instinctively ya
nking hard at his chains.  
 
Then, without warning, a hand was on 
his face, removing his blindfold. 
 
The flame before him reflected in the black ey
es of Inoue Sato as she pressed the match 
against the cigarette dangling from her lips, only inches away from Bellamy™s face. 
 
She glared at him in the moonlight that 
filtered down through the glass ceiling. She 
looked pleased to see his fear. 
 
ﬁSo, Mr. Bellamy,ﬂ Sato said, shaking out the match. ﬁWhere shall we begin?ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 70 
 
 
 
A magic square.
 Katherine nodded as she eyed the numbered square in Dürer™s 
engraving. Most people would have thought 
Langdon had lost his mind, but Katherine 
had quickly realized he was right. 
 
The term 
magic square
 referred not to something 
mystical but to something 
mathematicalŠit was the name given to a grid
 of consecutive numbers arranged in such a 
way that all the rows, columns, and diagonals
 added up to the same thing. Created some 
four thousand years ago by mathematicians in 
Egypt and India, magic squares were still 
believed by some to hold magical powers. Kath
erine had read that even nowadays devout 
Indians drew special three-by-three magic squares called 
the Kubera Kolam on their 
pooja altars. Primarily, though, modern man had 
relegated magic squares to the category 
of ﬁrecreational mathematics,ﬂ some people s
till deriving pleasure from the quest to 
discover new ﬁmagicalﬂ configurations. 
Sudoku for geniuses.
 
 
Katherine quickly analyzed Dürer™s square, 
adding up the numbers in several rows and 
columns. 
 
 
 
ﬁThirty-four,ﬂ she said. ﬁEvery direction adds up to thirty-four.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁBut did you know that 
this
 magic square is famous because 
Dürer accomplished the seemingly impossible?ﬂ 
He quickly showed Katherine that in 
addition to making the rows, columns, and diag
onals add up to thirty-four, Dürer had also 
found a way to make the four quadrants, the four
 center squares, and even the four corner 
squares add up to that number. ﬁMost am
azing, though, was Dürer™s ability to position 
the numbers 15 and 14 together in the bottom row 
as an indication of the year in which he 
accomplished this incredible feat!ﬂ 
 
Katherine scanned the numbers, amazed by all the combinations. 
 
Langdon™s tone grew more exc
ited now. ﬁExtraordinarily, 
Melencolia I
 represents the 
very first time in history that
 a magic square appeared in 
European
 art. Some historians 
believe this was Dürer™s encoded way of 
indicating that the Ancient Mysteries had 
traveled outside the Egyptian Mystery Schools 
and were now held by the European secret 
societies.ﬂ Langdon paused. ﬁWhich
 brings us back to . . . 
this
.ﬂ 
 
He motioned to the slip of paper bearing 
the grid of letters 
from the stone pyramid. 
 
 
 
ﬁI assume the layout looks familiar now?ﬂ Langdon asked. 
 
ﬁFour-by-four square.ﬂ 
 
Langdon picked up the pencil and carefully tr
anscribed Dürer™s numbered magic square 
onto the slip of paper, direct
ly beside the lettered square. 
Katherine was now seeing just 
how easy this was going to be. He stood poise
d, pencil in hand, and yet . . . strangely, 
after all this enthusiasm, he seemed to hesitate. 
 
ﬁRobert?ﬂ 
 
He turned to her, his expre
ssion one of trep
idation. ﬁAre you 
sure
 we want to do this? 
Peter expresslyŠﬂ 
 
ﬁRobert, if 
you
 don™t want to decipher this engraving, then 
I
 will.ﬂ She held out her hand 
for the pencil. 
 
Langdon could tell there would be no deterri
ng her and so he acquiesced, turning his 
attention back to the pyramid. Carefully, he
 superimposed the magic square over the 
pyramid™s grid of letters and assigned each le
tter a number. Then he created a new grid, 
placing the Masonic cipher™s letters in th
e new order as defined by the sequence in 
Dürer™s magic square. 
 
When Langdon was finished, they both examined the result. 
 
 
 
 
 
Katherine immediately felt confus
ed. ﬁIt™s stil
l gibberish.ﬂ 
 
Langdon remained silent a long moment. ﬁActua
lly, Katherine, it™s not gibberish.ﬂ His 
eyes brightened again with the thri
ll of discovery. ﬁI
t™s . . . Latin.ﬂ 
 
In a long, dark corridor, an old blind man sh
uffled as quickly as 
he could toward his 
office. When he finally arrived, he collapsed in
 his desk chair, his old bones grateful for 
the reprieve. His answering machine was beep
ing. He pressed the button and listened. 
 
ﬁIt™s Warren Bellamy,ﬂ said the hushed whispe
r of his friend and Ma
sonic brother. ﬁI™m 
afraid I have alarming news . . .ﬂ 
 
Katherine Solomon™s eyes shot back to the grid of letters, reexamining the text. Sure 
enough, a Latin word now materi
alized before her eyes. 
Jeova.
 
 
 
 
Katherine had not studied Latin, but this word was familiar from her reading of ancient 
Hebrew texts. 
Jeova. Jehovah.
 As her eyes continued to trace downward, reading the grid 
like a book, she was surprised to 
realize she could read the 
entire
 text of the pyramid. 
 
Jeova Sanctus Unus.
 
 
She knew its meaning at once. This phrase wa
s ubiquitous in modern translations of 
Hebrew scripture. In the Torah, the G
od of the Hebrews was known by many namesŠ
Jeova, Jehovah, Jeshua, Yahweh, the Source, the ElohimŠ
but many Roman translations 
had consolidated the confusing nomenc
lature into a single Latin phrase: 
Jeova Sanctus 
Unus.
 
 
ﬁOne true God?ﬂ she whispered to herself.
 The phrase certainly did not seem like 
something that would help them find her brot
her. ﬁThat™s this pyramid™s secret message? 
One true God? I thought this was a map.ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked equally perplexed, the excite
ment in his eyes evaporating. ﬁThis 
decryption obviously is correct, but . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe man who has my brother wants to know a 
location
.ﬂ She tucked her hair behind her 
ear. ﬁThis is not going to make him very happy.ﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine,ﬂ Langdon said, heaving a sigh. ﬁI™ve b
een afraid of this. All night, I™ve had a 
feeling we™re treating as r
eality a collection of myths 
and allegories. Maybe this 
inscription is pointing to a 
metaphorical
 locationŠtelling us that
 the true potential of 
man can be accessed only through the one true God.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut that makes no 
sense
!ﬂ Katherine replied, her jaw now
 clenched in frustration. ﬁMy 
family protected this pyramid for generations! One true God? 
That™s
 the secret? And the 
CIA considers this an issue of national secu
rity? Either they™re lying or we™re missing 
something!ﬂ 
 
Langdon shrugged in accord. 
 
Just then, his phone began to ring. 
 
In a cluttered office lined w
ith old books, the old man hunched over his desk, clutching a 
phone receiver in his arthritic hand. 
 
The line rang and rang. 
 
At last, a tentative voice answered. ﬁH
ello?ﬂ The voice was deep but uncertain. 
 
The old man whispered, ﬁI was 
told you require sanctuary.ﬂ  
 
The man on the line seemed startled. ﬁWho is this? Did Warren BellŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo names, please,ﬂ the old man said. ﬁTell 
me, have you successfully protected the map 
that was entrusted to you?ﬂ 
 
A startled pause. ﬁYes . . . but I don™t think it
 matters. It doesn™t say much. If it is a map, 
it seems to be more 
metaphorical
 thanŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, the map is quite real, I assu
re you. And it points to a very 
real
 location. You must 
keep it safe. I cannot impress upon you enough 
how important this is. You are being 
pursued, but if you can travel unseen to my 
location, I will provide sanctuary . . . and 
answers.ﬂ 
 
The man hesitated, apparently uncertain. 
 
ﬁMy friend,ﬂ the old man began, choosing his 
words carefully. ﬁThere is a refuge in 
Rome, north of the Tiber, which contains ten 
stones from Mount Sinai, one from heaven 
itself, and one with the visage of Luke
™s dark father. Do you know my location?ﬂ 
 
There was a long pause on the line, a
nd then the man replied, ﬁYes, I do.ﬂ 
 
The old man smiled
. I thought you might, Professor. ﬁ
Come at once. Make sure you™re 
not followed.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 71 
 
 
 
Mal™akh stood
 naked in the billowing warmth of hi
s steam shower. He felt pure again, 
having washed off the last remaining scent 
of ethanol. As the eucalyptus-infused vapors 
permeated his skin, he could feel his pores ope
ning to the heat. Then he began his ritual. 
 
First, he rubbed depilatory chemicals acr
oss his tattooed body and scalp, removing any 
traces of body hair. 
Hairless were the gods of the seven islands of Heliades.
 Then he 
massaged Abramelin oil into his 
softened and receptive flesh. 
Abramelin is the sacred oil 
of the great Magi.
 Then he turned his shower lever ha
rd to the left, and the water turned 
ice cold. He stood beneath the frigid water for 
a full minute to close his pores and trap the 
heat and energy within his core. The cold serv
ed as a reminder of the icy river in which 
this transformation had begun. 
 
When he stepped from the shower, he was sh
ivering, but within s
econds, his core heat 
emanated up through his layers of flesh and 
warmed him. Mal™akh™s insides felt like a 
furnace. He stood naked before the mirror and admired his form . . . perhaps the last time 
he would see himself as a mere mortal. 
 
His feet were the talons of a hawk. His le
gsŠBoaz and JachinŠwere the ancient pillars 
of wisdom. His hips and abdomen were 
the archways of my
stical power. Hanging 
beneath the archway, his massive
 sex organ bore the tattooed 
symbols of his destiny. In 
another life, this heavy shaf
t of flesh had been his source of carnal pleasure. But no 
longer. 
 
I have been purified.
 
 
Like the mystical eunuch monks of Katharoi, 
Mal™akh had removed hi
s testicles. He had 
sacrificed his physical potency for a more worthy one. 
Gods have no gender.
 Having 
shed the human imperfection of gender along 
with the earthly pull of sexual temptation, 
Mal™akh had become like Ouranos, Attis, Sporus, and the great castrati magicians of 
Arthurian legend. 
Every spiritual metamorphosis is preceded by a physical one.
 Such was 
the lesson of all the great gods . . . from Osir
is, to Tammuz, to Jesus, to Shiva, to the 
Buddha himself. 
 
I must shed the man who clothes me.
 
 
Abruptly, Mal™akh drew his gaze upward, pa
st the double-headed phoenix on his chest, 
past the collage of ancient sigils adorning his 
face, and directly to the top of his head. He 
tipped his head toward the mirror, barely able 
to see the circle of bare flesh that waited 
there. This location on the body was sacred. Know
n as the fontanel, it was the one area of 
the human skull that remained open at birth. 
An oculus to the brain.
 Although this 
physiological portal closes within
 a matter of months, it remain
s a symbolic vestige of the 
lost connection between th
e outer and inner worlds. 
 
Mal™akh studied the sacred pa
tch of virginal sk
in, which was enclos
ed by the crownlike 
circle of an 
ouroboros
Ša mystical snake devouring its 
own tail. The bare flesh seemed 
to stare back at him . . . bright with promise. 
 
Robert Langdon soon would uncover the grea
t treasure that Mal™akh required. Once 
Mal™akh possessed it, the void on 
top of his head would be fill
ed, and he would at last be 
prepared for his final transformation. 
 
Mal™akh padded across his bedroom and took 
from his bottom drawer a long strip of 
white silk. As he had done many times be
fore, he wrapped it around his groin and 
buttocks. Then he went downstairs. 
 
In his office, his computer had received an e-mail message. 
 
It was from his contact: 
 
WHAT YOU REQUIRE IS NOW WITHIN REACH. 
 
I WILL CONTACT YOU WITHIN
 THE HOUR. PATIENCE.  
 
Mal™akh smiled. It was time to
 make final preparations. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 72 
 
 
 
The CIA
 field agent was in a foul mood as he 
descended from the reading-room balcony. 
Bellamy lied to us.
 The agent had seen no heat signatures whatsoever upstairs near the 
Moses statue, nor anywhere else upstairs for that matter. 
 
So where the hell did Langdon go?
 
 
The agent retraced his steps now to the only 
place they™d spotted any heat signatures at 
allŠthe library™s distribution hub. He desce
nded the stairs again, moving beneath the 
octagonal console. The noise of the rumbling 
conveyors was grating. Advancing into the 
space, he flipped down his thermal goggles 
and scanned the room. Nothing. He looked 
toward the stacks, where the mangled door st
ill showed hot from the explosion. Other 
than that, he saw noŠ 
 
Holy shit!
 
 
The agent jumped back as an unexpected lu
minescence drifted into his field of vision. 
Like a pair of ghosts, the dimly glowing im
prints of two humanoids had just emerged 
from the wall on a conveyor belt. 
Heat signatures.
 
 
Stunned, the agent watched as the two appari
tions circled the room on the conveyor loop 
and then disappeared headfirst into a narrow hole in the wall
. They rode the conveyor 
out? That™s insanity.
 
 
In addition to realizing they had just lost
 Robert Langdon through a hole in the wall, the 
field agent was now aware th
at he had another problem. 
Langdon™s not alone?
 
 
He was just about to switch on his transcei
ver and call the team 
leader, but the team 
leader beat him to it. 
 
ﬁAll points, we™ve got an abandoned Volvo on the plaza in front of the library. Registered 
to one Katherine Solomon. Eyewitness says 
she entered the library not long ago. We 
suspect she™s with Robert Langdon. Director Sa
to has ordered that we find them both 
immediately.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ve got heat signatures for both of them!ﬂ shouted th
e field agent in the distribution 
room. He explained the situation. 
 
ﬁFor Christ™s sake!ﬂ the team leader re
plied. ﬁWhere the hell 
does the conveyor go?ﬂ 
 
The field agent was already consulting the 
employee reference schematic on the bulletin 
board. ﬁAdams Building,ﬂ he replied. ﬁOne block from here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAll points. Redirect to the Adams Building! NOW!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 73 
 
 
 
Sanctuary. Answers.
 
 
The words echoed in Langdon™s mind as he a
nd Katherine burst th
rough a side door of 
the Adams Building and out into the cold 
winter night. The my
sterious caller had 
conveyed his location cryptically, but La
ngdon had understood. Kather
ine™s reaction to 
their destination had been surprisingly sanguine: 
Where better to find One True God?
 
 
Now the question was how to get there. 
 
Langdon spun in place, trying to get his bearings
. It was dark, but th
ankfully the weather 
had cleared. They were standing in a small c
ourtyard. In the distance, the Capitol Dome 
looked startlingly far away, and Langdon realized this was the first moment he had 
stepped outside since arriving at
 the Capitol several hours ago. 
 
So much for my lecture.
 
 
ﬁRobert, look.ﬂ Katherine poi
nted toward the silhouette
 of the Jefferson Building. 
 
Langdon™s first reaction on seeing 
the building was astonishment
 that they had traveled 
so far underground on a conveyor belt. His se
cond reaction, however, was alarm. The 
Jefferson Building was now abuzz with act
ivityŠtrucks and cars pulling in, men 
shouting. 
Is that a searchlight?
 
 
Langdon grabbed Katherine™s hand. ﬁCome on.ﬂ 
 
They ran northeast across the courtyard, 
quickly disappearing from view behind an 
elegant U-shaped building, wh
ich Langdon realized was the Folger Shakespeare Library. 
This particular building seemed appropriate 
camouflage for them tonight, as it housed the 
original Latin manuscrip
t of Francis Bacon™s 
New Atlantis,
 the utopian vision on which 
the American forefathers had allegedl
y modeled a new world based on ancient 
knowledge. Even so, Langdon would not be stopping. 
 
We need a cab.
 
 
They arrived at the corner of
 Third Street and East Capito
l. The traffic was sparse, and 
Langdon felt fading hope as he scanned for taxi
s. He and Katherine hurried northward on 
Third Street, putting distance between themselves
 and the Library of Congress. It was not 
until they had gone an entire block that 
Langdon finally spotted a cab rounding the 
corner. He flagged it down, and the cab pulled over. 
 
Middle Eastern music played on his radio, 
and the young Arab driver gave them a 
friendly smile. ﬁWhere to?ﬂ the driver asked as they jumped into the car. 
 
ﬁWe need to go toŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNorthwest!ﬂ Katherine interjected, pointi
ng up Third Street away from the Jefferson 
Building. ﬁDrive toward Union Station, then 
left on Massachusetts Avenue. We™ll tell 
you when to stop.ﬂ 
 
The driver shrugged, closed the Plexiglas 
divider, and turned his music back on. 
 
Katherine shot Langdon an admonishing l
ook as if to say: ﬁLeave no trail
.
ﬂ She pointed 
out the window, directing Langdon™
s attention to a black helicopt
er that was skimming in 
low, approaching the area. 
Shit.
 Sato was apparently dead serious about recovering 
Solomon™s pyramid. 
 
As they watched the helicopter land be
tween the Jefferson and Adams buildings, 
Katherine turned to him, l
ooking increasingly worried. ﬁCan
 I see your cell phone for a 
second?ﬂ 
 
Langdon handed her his phone. 
 
ﬁPeter told me you have an eidetic memo
ry?ﬂ she said, rolling down her window. ﬁAnd 
that you remember every phone 
number you™ve ever dialed?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s true, butŠﬂ 
 
Katherine hurled his phone out into the ni
ght. Langdon spun in his 
seat and watched as 
his cell phone cartwheeled and 
splintered into pieces on 
the pavement behind them. 
ﬁWhy did you do that!ﬂ 
 
ﬁOff the grid,ﬂ Katherine said, her eyes grav
e. ﬁThis pyramid is our only hope of finding 
my brother, and I have no intention 
of letting the CIA steal it from us.ﬂ 
 
In the front seat, Omar Amirana bobbed hi
s head and hummed along with his music. 
Tonight had been slow, and he felt blessed to 
finally have a fare. Hi
s cab was just passing 
Stanton Park, when the familiar voice of his company dispatcher crackled over the radio. 
 
ﬁThis is Dispatch. All vehicles in the area of
 the National Mall. We have just received a 
bulletin from government authorities regardi
ng two fugitives in the area of the Adams 
Building . . .ﬂ 
 
Omar listened in amazement as Dispatch described the precise couple  
in his cab. He stole an uneasy glance in his r
earview mirror. Omar had to admit, the tall 
guy 
did
 look familiar somehow. 
Did I see him on
 America™s Most Wanted
?
 
 
Gingerly, Omar reached for his radio handset. 
ﬁDispatch?ﬂ he said, speaking quietly into 
the transceiver. ﬁThis is cab one-three-four
. The two people you asked aboutŠthey are in 
my cab . . . right now.ﬂ 
 
Dispatch immediately advised Omar what to
 do. Omar™s hands were trembling as he 
called the phone number Dispatch had given hi
m. The voice that answered was tight and 
efficient, like that of a soldier. 
 
ﬁThis is Agent Turner Simkins, CIA field ops. Who is this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁUm . . . I™m the taxi driver?ﬂ Omar sai
d. ﬁI was told to call about the twoŠﬂ 
 
ﬁAre the fugitives currently in your vehicle? Answer only yes or no.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCan they hear this c
onversation? Yes or no?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo. The slider isŠﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere are you taking them?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNorthwest on Massachusetts.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSpecific destination?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThey didn™t say.ﬂ 
 
The agent hesitated. ﬁIs the male passenger carrying a leather bag?ﬂ 
 
Omar glanced in the rearview mirror, and hi
s eyes went wide. ﬁYes! That bag doesn™t 
have explosives or anything inŠﬂ 
 
ﬁListen carefully,ﬂ the agent said. ﬁYou ar
e in no danger so long as you follow my 
directions exactly. Is that clear?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat is your name?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOmar,ﬂ he said, breaking a sweat. 
 
ﬁListen, Omar,ﬂ the man said calmly. ﬁYou™re
 doing great. I want you to drive as slowly 
as possible while I get my team out
 in front of you. Do you understand?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAlso, is your cab equipped with an interc
om system so you can communicate with them 
in the backseat?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir.ﬂ 
 
ﬁGood. Here™s what I want you to do.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 74 
 
 
 
The Jungle,
 as it is known, is the centerpiece of
 the U.S. Botanic Garden (USBG)Š
America™s living museumŠlocated adjacent to 
the U.S. Capitol Building. Technically a 
rain forest, the Jungle is housed in a toweri
ng greenhouse, complete with soaring rubber 
trees, strangler figs, and a canopy ca
twalk for more daring tourists. 
 
Normally, Warren Bellamy felt nurtured by the 
Jungle™s earthy smells and the sunlight 
glinting through the mist that filtered down fr
om the vapor nozzles in
 the glass ceiling. 
Tonight, however, lit only by moonlight, th
e Jungle terrified him. He was sweating 
profusely, writhing against the cramps that now
 stabbed at his arms, still pinned painfully 
behind him. 
 
Director Sato paced before him, puffing 
calmly on her cigaretteŠthe equivalent of 
ecoterrorism in this carefully 
calibrated environment. Her face looked almost demonic in 
the smoke-filled moonlight that streamed 
down through the glass ceiling overhead. 
 
ﬁSo then,ﬂ Sato continued, ﬁwhen you arrive
d at the Capitol tonight, and you discovered 
that I was already there . . . you made a decision. Rather than
 making your presence 
known to me, you descended quietly
 into the SBB, where, at 
great risk to yourself, you 
attacked Chief Anderson and myself, and you helped Langdon escape with the pyramid 
and capstone.ﬂ She rubbed her s
houlder. ﬁAn interesting choice.ﬂ 
 
A choice I would make again,
 Bellamy thought. ﬁWhere is Peter?ﬂ he demanded angrily. 
 
ﬁHow would 
I
 know?ﬂ Sato said. 
 
ﬁYou seem to know everything else!ﬂ Bellamy 
fired back at her, making no attempt to 
hide his suspicion that she was somehow behi
nd all this. ﬁYou knew to go to the Capitol 
Building. You knew to find Robert Langdon. And you even knew to X-ray Langdon™s 
bag to find the capstone. Obviously, someone 
is giving you a lot of inside information.ﬂ 
 
Sato laughed coldly and stepped closer to him. ﬁMr. Bellamy, is 
that
 why you attacked 
me? Do you think I™m the 
enemy
? Do you think I™m trying to 
steal your little pyramid?ﬂ 
Sato took a drag on her cigarette and blew
 the smoke out of her nostrils. ﬁListen 
carefully. No one understands 
better than I do the importan
ce of keeping secrets. I 
believe, as you do, that there is certain in
formation to which the masses should not be 
privy. Tonight, however, there ar
e forces at work that I f
ear you have not yet grasped. 
The man who kidnapped Peter Solomon holds 
enormous power . . . a power that you 
apparently have yet to realiz
e. Believe me, he is a walking time bomb . . . capable of 
initiating a series of events that will
 profoundly change the world as you know it.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t understand.ﬂ Bellamy shifted on the 
bench, his arms aching in his handcuffs. 
 
ﬁYou don™t 
need
 to understand. You need to obey. Ri
ght now, my only hope of averting a 
major disaster is to cooperate with this man 
. . . and to give him exactly what he wants. 
Which means, you are going to call Mr. Langdo
n and tell him to turn himself in, along 
with the pyramid and capstone. Once Langdon 
is in my custody, he will decrypt the 
pyramid™s inscription, obtain whatever info
rmation this man is demanding, and provide 
him with exactly what he wants.ﬂ 
 
The location of the spiral staircase 
that leads to the Ancient Mysteries?
 ﬁI can™t do that. 
I™ve taken vows of secrecy.ﬂ  
 
Sato erupted. ﬁI don™t give a damn 
what
 you™ve vowed, I will throw you in prison so 
fastŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThreaten me all you like,ﬂ Bellamy said
 defiantly. ﬁI will not help you.ﬂ 
 
Sato took a deep breath and spoke now in 
a fearsome whisper. ﬁMr. Bellamy, you have 
no idea what™s really go
ing on tonight, do you?ﬂ 
 
The tense silence hung for several seconds, fi
nally broken by the sound of Sato™s phone. 
She plunged her hand into her pocket and eager
ly snatched it out. 
ﬁTalk to me,ﬂ she 
answered, listening carefully to the reply. ﬁW
here is their taxi now? How long? Okay, 
good. Bring them to the U.S. Botanic Garden. Service entrance. And make sure you get 
me that god-damn pyramid and capstone.ﬂ 
 
Sato hung up and turned back to Bellamy w
ith a smug smile. ﬁWell then . . . it seems 
you™re fast outliving your usefulness.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 75 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 stared blankly into space, feeling t
oo tired to urge the slow-moving taxi 
driver to pick up the pace. Beside him, Kath
erine had fallen silent, 
too, looking frustrated 
by their lack of understanding of what made the pyramid so special. They had again been 
through everything they knew about the pyrami
d, the capstone, and the evening™s strange 
events; they still had no ideas as to how this
 pyramid could possibly 
be considered a map 
to anything at all. 
 
Jeova Sanctus Unus? The secret hides within The Order?
 
 
Their mysterious contact had promised them an
swers if they could meet him at a specific 
place. 
A refuge in Rome, north of the Tiber.
 Langdon knew the forefathers™ ﬁnew Romeﬂ 
had been renamed Washington early in her hist
ory, and yet vestiges of their original 
dream remained: the Tiber™s waters still flowed into the Potomac; senators still convened 
beneath a replica of St. Pete
r™s dome; and Vulcan and Minerva still watched over the 
Rotunda™s long-extinguished flame. 
 
The answers sought by Langdon and Katherine were apparently waiting for them just a 
few miles ahead. 
Northwest on Massachusetts Avenue.
 Their destination was indeed a 
refuge . . . north of Washington™s Tiber 
Creek. Langdon wished the driver would speed 
up. 
 
Abruptly, Katherine jolted upright in her seat
, as if she had made a sudden realization. 
ﬁOh my God, Robert!ﬂ She turned to him, 
her face going white. She hesitated a moment 
and then spoke emphatically. ﬁWe™re going the wrong way!ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, this is right,ﬂ Langdon counter
ed. ﬁIt™s northwest on MassachuŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNo! I mean we™re going to the wrong 
place
!ﬂ 
 
Langdon was mystified. He had already told 
Katherine how he knew what location was 
being described by the mysterious caller. 
It contains ten stones from Mount Sinai, one 
from heaven itself, and one with th
e visage of Luke™s dark father.
 Only one building on 
earth could make those claims. And that 
was exactly where this taxi was headed. 
 
ﬁKatherine, I™m certain th
e location is correct.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo!ﬂ she shouted. ﬁWe don™t need to go 
there
 anymore. I figured out the pyramid and 
capstone! I know what th
is is all about!ﬂ 
 
Langdon was amazed. ﬁYou understand it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes! We have to go to Freedom Plaza instead!ﬂ 
 
Now Langdon was lost. Freedom Plaza, alt
hough nearby, seemed totally irrelevant. 
 
ﬁJeova Sanctus Unus!ﬂ
 Katherine said. ﬁThe One True 
God of the Hebrews. The sacred 
symbol of the 
Hebrews
 is the Jewish starŠthe Seal of
 SolomonŠan important symbol to 
the Masons!ﬂ She fished a dollar bill out
 of her pocket. ﬁGive me your pen.ﬂ 
 
Bewildered, Langdon pulled a 
pen from his jacket. 
 
ﬁLook.ﬂ She spread the bill out on her thigh a
nd took his pen, pointing 
to the Great Seal 
on the back. ﬁIf you superimpose Solomon™s seal 
on the Great Seal of the United States . . 
.ﬂ She drew the symbol of a Jewish star precisely over the pyramid. ﬁLook what you get!ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked down at the bill and then b
ack at Katherine as if she were mad. 
 
ﬁRobert, look more closely! Don™t you see what I™m 
pointing
 at?ﬂ 
 
He glanced back at the drawing. 
 
 
 
What in the world is she getting at?
 Langdon had seen this image before. It was popular 
among conspiracy theorists as ﬁproofﬂ that 
the Masons held secret influence over our 
early nation. When the six-point
ed star was laid perfectly 
over the Great Seal of the 
United States, the star™s top vertex fit perfec
tly over the Masonic all-seeing eye . . . and, 
quite eerily, the other five verti
ces clearly pointed to the letters 
M-A-S-O-N.
 
 
ﬁKatherine, that™s just a coincidence, and I 
still don™t see how it has anything to do with 
Freedom Plaza.ﬂ 
 
ﬁLook again!ﬂ she said, sounding almost angr
y now. ﬁYou™re not looking where I am 
pointing
! Right there. Don™t you see it?ﬂ 
 
An instant later, Langdon saw it. 
 
CIA field-operations leader Turner Simk
ins stood outside the Adams Building and 
pressed his cell phone tightly to his ear, st
raining to hear the 
conversation now taking 
place in the back of the taxi. 
Something just happened.
 His team was about to board the 
modified Sikorsky UH-60 helicopter to head 
northwest and set up a roadblock, but now it 
seemed the situation had suddenly changed. 
 
Seconds ago, Katherine Solomon had begun 
insisting they were going to the wrong 
destination. Her explanationŠsomething about 
the dollar bill and Jewish starsŠmade no 
sense to the team leader, nor, apparently, to
 Robert Langdon. At least at first. Now, 
however, Langdon seemed to have grasped her meaning. 
 
ﬁMy God, you™re right!ﬂ Langdon blur
ted. ﬁI didn™t see it earlier!ﬂ 
 
Suddenly Simkins could hear someone banging on 
the driver™s divider, and then it slid 
open. ﬁChange of plans,ﬂ Katherine shouted to the driver. ﬁTake us to Freedom Plaza!ﬂ 
 
ﬁFreedom Plaza?ﬂ the cabbie 
said, sounding nervous. ﬁNot nor
thwest on Massachusetts?ﬂ 
 
ﬁForget that!ﬂ Katherine shouted. ﬁFree
dom Plaza! Go left here! Here! HERE!ﬂ 
 
Agent Simkins heard the cab screeching around 
a corner. Katherine was talking excitedly 
again to Langdon, saying something about th
e famous bronze cast of the Great Seal 
embedded in the plaza. 
 
ﬁMa™am, just to confirm,ﬂ the cabbie™s voice 
interjected, sounding te
nse. ﬁWe™re going to 
Freedom PlazaŠon the corner of 
Pennsylvania and Thirteenth?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes!ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁHurry!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s very close. Two minutes.ﬂ 
 
Simkins smiled. 
Nicely done, Omar.
 As he dashed toward the idling helicopter, he 
shouted to his team. ﬁWe™ve got them! Freedom Plaza! Move!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 76 
 
 
 
Freedom Plaza
 is a map. 
 
Located at the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue
 and Thirteenth Street, the plaza™s vast 
surface of inlaid stone depict
s the streets of Washington as they were originally 
envisioned by Pierre L™Enfant. The plaza is a popular tourist destination not only because 
the giant map is fun to walk on, but also because Martin Luther King Jr., for whom 
Freedom Plaza is named, wrote much of hi
s ﬁI Have a Dreamﬂ speech in the nearby 
Willard Hotel. 
 
D.C. cabdriver Omar Amirana brought tourists
 to Freedom Plaza all the time, but tonight, 
his two passengers were obvious
ly no ordinary sightseers. 
The CIA is chasing them?
 
Omar had barely come to a stop at the curb
 before the man and woman had jumped out. 
 
ﬁStay right here!ﬂ the man in the tweed 
coat told Omar. ﬁWe™ll be right back!ﬂ 
 
Omar watched the two people dash out onto 
the wide-open spaces of the enormous map, 
pointing and shouting as they scanned the geom
etry of intersecting streets. Omar grabbed 
his cell phone off the dashboard. ﬁSir, are you still there?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, Omar!ﬂ a voice shouted, barely audible 
over a thundering noise
 on his end of the 
line. ﬁWhere are they now?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOut on the map. It seems like they™re looking for something.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDo not let them out of your sight,ﬂ 
the agent shouted. ﬁI™m almost there!ﬂ 
 
Omar watched as the two fugitives quickly 
found the plaza™s famous Great SealŠone of 
the largest bronze medallions ever cast. They
 stood over it a mome
nt and quickly began 
pointing to the southwest. Then the man in 
tweed came racing back toward the cab. Omar 
quickly set his phone down on the dashboard as the man arrived, breathless. 
 
ﬁWhich direction is Alexandr
ia, Virginia?ﬂ he demanded.  
 
ﬁAlexandria?ﬂ Omar pointed southwest, th
e exact same direction the man and woman 
had just pointed toward. 
 
ﬁI knew it!ﬂ the man whispered beneath his 
breath. He spun and shouted back to the 
woman. ﬁYou™re right! Alexandria!ﬂ 
 
The woman now pointed across the plaza to 
an illuminated ﬁMetroﬂ sign nearby. ﬁThe 
Blue Line goes directly there.
 We want King Street Station!ﬂ 
 
Omar felt a surge of panic. 
Oh no.
 
 
The man turned back to Omar and handed him entirely too many bills for the fare. 
ﬁThanks. We™re all set.ﬂ He hoisted
 his leather bag and ran off. 
 
ﬁWait! I can drive you! I 
go there all the time!ﬂ 
 
But it was too late. The man and woman were
 already dashing across the plaza. They 
disappeared down the stairs into 
the Metro Center subway station. 
 
Omar grabbed his cell phone. ﬁSir! They ran 
down into the subway
! I couldn™t stop them! 
They™re taking the Blue 
Line to Alexandria!ﬂ 
 
ﬁStay right there!ﬂ the agent shouted. 
ﬁI™ll be there in fifteen seconds!ﬂ 
 
Omar looked down at the wad of bills the man had given him. The bill on top was 
apparently the one they had been writing on. It 
had a Jewish star on t
op of the Great Seal 
of the United States. Sure enough, the star
™s points fell on letters that spelled 
MASON
. 
 
Without warning, Omar felt a deafening vibra
tion all around him, as if a tractor trailer 
were about to collide with his cab. He looke
d up, but the street was deserted. The noise 
increased, and suddenly a sleek black helic
opter dropped down out of the night and 
landed hard in the middle of the plaza map. 
 
A group of black-clad men jump
ed out. Most ran toward th
e subway station, but one 
came dashing toward Omar™s cab. He yanked 
open the passenger door. ﬁOmar? Is that 
you?ﬂ 
 
Omar nodded, speechless. 
 
ﬁDid they say where they were headed?ﬂ the agent demanded. 
 
ﬁAlexandria! King Street Station,ﬂ Omar 
blurted. ﬁI offered to drive, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁDid they say 
where
 in Alexandria they were going?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo! They looked at the medallion of the Great Seal on the plaza, then they asked about 
Alexandria, and they paid me with 
this
.ﬂ He handed the agent 
the dollar bill with the 
bizarre diagram. As the agent studied th
e bill, Omar suddenly put it all together. 
The 
Masons! Alexandria!
 One of the most famous Masonic buildings in America was in 
Alexandria. ﬁThat™s it!ﬂ he 
blurted. ﬁThe George Washi
ngton Masonic Memorial! It™s 
directly across from King Street Station!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat it is,ﬂ the agent said, apparently having ju
st come to the same realization as the rest 
of the agents came sprinting back from the station. 
 
ﬁWe missed them!ﬂ one of the men yelled. ﬁBlu
e Line just left! They™re not down there!ﬂ 
 
Agent Simkins checked his watch and turned back to Omar. ﬁHow long does the subway 
take to Alexandria?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTen minutes at least. Probably more.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOmar, you™ve done an excellent job. Thank you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSure. What™s this all about?!ﬂ 
 
But Agent Simkins was already running back 
to the chopper, shouti
ng as he went. ﬁKing 
Street Station! We™ll get there before they do!ﬂ 
 
Bewildered, Omar watched the great black bird 
lift off. It banked hard to the south across 
Pennsylvania Avenue, and then t
hundered off into the night. 
 
Underneath the cabbie™s feet, a subway train 
was picking up speed as it headed away 
from Freedom Plaza. On board, Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon sat breathless, 
neither one saying a word as the train 
whisked them toward their destination. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 77 
 
 
 
The memory
 always began the same way. 
 
He was falling . . . plummeting backward toward an ice-covered river at the bottom of a 
deep ravine. Above him, the merciless gray 
eyes of Peter Solomon stared down over the 
barrel of Andros™s handgun. As he fell, 
the world above him receded, everything 
disappearing as he was enveloped by the cloud of billowing mist from the waterfall 
upstream. 
 
For an instant, everything was white, like heaven. 
 
Then he hit the ice. 
 
Cold. Black. Pain. 
 
He was tumbling . . . being dragged by a pow
erful force that pounded him relentlessly 
across rocks in an impossibly cold void. His lu
ngs ached for air, and yet his chest muscles 
had contracted so violently in the cold
 that he was unable even to inhale. 
 
I™m under the ice.
 
 
The ice near the waterfall was apparently 
thin on account of the turbulent water, and 
Andros had broken directly through it. Now 
he was being washed downstream, trapped 
beneath a transparent ceiling. He clawed at the 
underside of the ice, 
trying to break out, 
but he had no leverage. The searing pain 
from the bullet hole in his shoulder was 
evaporating, as was the sting of the bird s
hot; both were blotted out now by the crippling 
throb of his body going numb. 
 
The current was accelerating, slingshotting 
him around a bend in the river. His body 
screamed for oxygen. Suddenly he was tangled in
 branches, lodged against a tree that had 
fallen into the water. 
Think!
 He groped wildly at the bran
ch, working his way toward the 
surface, finding the spot where the branch
 pierced up through the ice. His fingertips 
found the tiny space of open water surrounding th
e branch, and he pulled at the edges, 
trying to break the hole wider;
 once, twice, the opening wa
s growing, now several inches 
across. 
 
Propping himself against the branch, he tippe
d his head back and pressed his mouth 
against the small opening. The winter air th
at poured into his lungs felt warm. The 
sudden burst of oxygen fueled his hope. He planted his feet on the tree trunk and pressed 
his back and shoulders forcefully upward. 
The ice around the fallen tree, perforated by 
branches and debris, was weak
ened already, and as he drove
 his powerful legs into the 
trunk, his head and shoulders broke through the 
ice, crashing up into 
the winter night. Air 
poured into his lungs. Still mostly submerge
d, he wriggled desperately upward, pushing 
with his legs, pulling with his arms, until finally he was out of the water, lying breathless 
on the bare ice. 
 
Andros tore off his soaked ski mask and 
pocketed it, glancing back upstream for Peter 
Solomon. The bend in the river obscured his 
view. His chest was burning again. Quietly, 
he dragged a small branch over the hole in th
e ice in order to hide
 it. The hole would be 
frozen again by morning. 
 
As Andros staggered into the woods, it began 
to snow. He had no idea how far he had run 
when he stumbled out of the woods onto an 
embankment beside a small highway. He was 
delirious and hypothermic. The snow was falling harder now, and a single set of 
headlights approached in the distance. Andr
os waved wildly, and the lone pickup truck 
immediately pulled over. It had Vermont plates
. An old man in a red plaid shirt jumped 
out. 
 
Andros staggered toward him, holding his bleedi
ng chest. ﬁA hunter . . . shot me! I need a 
. . . hospital!ﬂ 
 
Without hesitation, the old man helped Andros 
up into the passenger s
eat of the truck and 
turned up the heater. ﬁWhere
™s the nearest hospital?!ﬂ 
 
Andros had no idea, but he 
pointed south. ﬁNext exit.ﬂ 
We™re not going to a hospital.
 
 
The old man from Vermont was reported mi
ssing the next day, but nobody had any idea 
where
 on his journey from Vermont he might
 have disappeared in the blinding 
snowstorm. Nor did anyone link his disappearance to the other news story that dominated 
the headlines the next dayŠthe s
hocking murder of Isabel Solomon. 
 
When Andros awoke, he was lying in a desola
te bedroom of a cheap motel that had been 
boarded up for the season. He recalled break
ing in and binding his wounds with torn 
bedsheets, and then burrowing into a flimsy be
d beneath a pile of mu
sty blankets. He was 
famished. 
 
He limped to the bathroom and saw the pile
 of bloody bird-shot pellets in the sink. He 
vaguely recalled prying them out of his chest.
 Raising his eyes to the dirty mirror, he 
reluctantly unwrapped his bloody bandages to 
survey the damage. The hard muscles of 
his chest and abdomen had stoppe
d the bird shot from penetr
ating too deep, and yet his 
body, once perfect, was now ruined with 
wounds. The single bullet fired by Peter 
Solomon had apparently gone cleanly thr
ough his shoulder, leaving a bloody crater. 
 
Making matters worse, Andros had failed to obta
in that for which he had traveled all this 
distance. 
The pyramid.
 His stomach growled, and he lim
ped outside to the man™s truck, 
hoping maybe to find food. The pickup was now covered with heavy snow, and Andros 
wondered how long he had been sleeping in this old motel. 
Thank God I woke up.
 Andros 
found no food anywhere in the front seat, but he
 did find some arthritis painkillers in the 
glove compartment. He took a handful, wash
ing them down with se
veral mouthfuls of 
snow. 
 
I need food.
 
 
A few hours later, the pickup that pulled ou
t from behind the old motel looked nothing 
like the truck that had pulled in two days ear
lier. The cab cap was 
missing, as were the 
hubcaps, bumper stickers, and all of the trim
. The Vermont plates were gone, replaced by 
those from an old maintenance truck Andros had found parked by the motel Dumpster, 
into which he had thrown all the bloody sheets,
 bird shot, and other 
evidence that he had 
ever been at the motel. 
 
Andros had not given up on the pyramid, but 
for the moment it would have to wait. He 
needed to hide, heal, and above all, 
eat
. He found a roadside diner where he gorged 
himself on eggs, bacon, hash browns, and thre
e glasses of orange juice. When he was 
done, he ordered more food to go. Back on the 
road, Andros listened to the truck™s old 
radio. He had not seen a television or newspa
per since his ordeal, and when he finally 
heard a local news statio
n, the report stunned him. 
 
ﬁFBI investigators,ﬂ a news announcer said, ﬁco
ntinue their search fo
r the armed intruder 
who murdered Isabel Solomon in her Potomac home two days ago. The murderer is 
believed to have fallen through the i
ce and been washed out to sea.ﬂ 
 
Andros froze. 
Murdered Isabel Solomon?
 He drove on in bewildered silence, listening to 
the full report. 
 
It was time to get far, far away from this place. 
 
The Upper West Side apartment offered breat
htaking views of Cent
ral Park. Andros had 
chosen it because the sea of green outside hi
s window reminded him of his lost view of 
the Adriatic. Although he knew he should be happy to be alive, he was not. The 
emptiness had never left him, and he found hi
mself fixated on his failed attempt to steal 
Peter Solomon™s pyramid. 
 
Andros had spent long hours researching the Legend of the Masonic Pyramid, and 
although nobody seemed to agree on whether 
or not the pyramid 
was real, they all 
concurred on its famous promis
e of vast wisdom and power. 
The Masonic Pyramid is 
real,
 Andros told himself. 
My inside information is irrefutable.
 
 
Fate had placed the pyramid w
ithin Andros™s reach, and he 
knew that ignoring it was like 
holding a winning lottery ticke
t and never cashing it in. 
I am the only non-Mason alive 
who knows the pyramid is real . . . as well 
as the identity of 
the man who guards it.
 
 
Months had passed, and alt
hough his body had healed, Andros was no longer the cocky 
specimen he had been in Greece. He ha
d stopped working out, and he had stopped 
admiring himself naked in the mirror. He felt 
as if his body were beginning to show signs 
of age. His once-perfect skin was a patchw
ork of scars, and this only depressed him 
further. He still relied on the painkillers th
at had nursed him through 
his recovery, and he 
felt himself slipping back to the lifestyle th
at had put him in Soganlik Prison. He didn™t 
care. 
The body craves what the body craves.
 
 
One night, he was in Greenwich Village 
buying drugs from a man whose forearm had 
been tattooed with a long, jagged lightning bol
t. Andros asked him about it, and the man 
told him the tattoo was covering a long scar 
he had gotten in a car accident. ﬁSeeing the 
scar every day reminded me of the accident,ﬂ 
the dealer said, ﬁand so I tattooed over it 
with a symbol of personal 
power. I took b
ack control.ﬂ 
 
That night, high on his new stash 
of drugs, Andros staggered in
to a local tattoo parlor and 
took off his shirt. ﬁI want to 
hide these scars,ﬂ he announced. 
I want to take back control.
 
 
ﬁHide them?ﬂ The tattoo artist eyed his chest. ﬁWith 
what
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁTattoos.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes . . . I mean tattoos of 
what
?ﬂ 
 
Andros shrugged, wanting nothing more than to 
hide the ugly reminders of his past. ﬁI 
don™t know. 
You
 choose.ﬂ 
 
The artist shook his head and handed Andros
 a pamphlet on the 
ancient and sacred 
tradition of tattooing. ﬁCome 
back when you™re ready.ﬂ 
 
Andros discovered that the New York Public
 Library had in its 
collection fifty-three 
books on tattooing, and within a few weeks, he 
had read them all. Having rediscovered 
his passion for reading, he began carrying 
entire backpacks of books back and forth 
between the library and his apartment, wh
ere he voraciously devoured them while 
overlooking Central Park. 
 
These books on tattoos had opened a door
 to a strange world Andros  
had never known existedŠa world of symbol
s, mysticism, mythology, and the magical 
arts. The more he read, the more he reali
zed how blind he had been. He began keeping 
notebooks of his ideas, his sketches, and hi
s strange dreams. When he could no longer 
find what he wanted at the library, he paid 
rare-book dealers to purchase for him some of 
the most esoteric texts on earth. 
 
De Praestigiis Daemonum . . . Lemegeton . . . 
Ars Almadel . . . Grimorium Verum . . . Ars 
Notoria . . .
 and on and on. He read them all, beco
ming more and more certain that the 
world still had many treasures yet to offer him. 
There are secrets out there that transcend 
human understanding.
 
 
Then he discovered the writings
 of Aleister CrowleyŠa visionary mystic from the early 
1900sŠwhom the church had deemed ﬁthe most evil man who ever lived.ﬂ 
Great minds 
are always feared by lesser minds.
 Andros learned about the power of ritual and 
incantation. He learned that sacred 
words,
 if properly spoken, f
unctioned like keys that 
opened gateways to other worlds. 
There is a shadow universe b
eyond this one . . . a world 
from which I can draw power.
 And although Andros longed to
 harness that power, he 
knew there were rules and tasks to be completed beforehand. 
 
Become something holy,
 Crowley wrote. 
Make yourself sacred.
 
 
The ancient rite of ﬁsacred makingﬂ had on
ce been the law of the land. From the early 
Hebrews who made burnt offerings at the Te
mple, to the Mayans who beheaded humans 
atop the pyramids of Chichén Itzá, to Jesus 
Christ, who offered his body on the cross, the 
ancients understood God™s requirement for 
sacrifice
. Sacrifice was the original ritual by 
which humans drew favor from the gods and made themselves holy. 
 
SacraŠ
sacred
.
 
 
FaceŠ
 make
.
 
 
Even though the rite of sacr
ifice had been abandoned e
ons ago, its power remained. 
There had been a handful of modern mystic
s, including Aleister 
Crowley, who practiced 
the Art, perfecting it over time,
 and transforming themselves gradually into something 
more. Andros craved to transform himself as 
they had. And yet he knew he would have to 
cross a dangerous bridge to do so. 
 
Blood is all that separates
 the light from the dark.
 
 
One night, a crow flew through Andros™s ope
n bathroom window and got trapped in his 
apartment. Andros watched the bird flutte
r around for a while and then finally stop, 
apparently accepting its inability to escape.
 Andros had learned enough to recognize a 
sign. 
I am being urged onward.
 
 
Clutching the bird in one hand, he st
ood at the makeshift altar in his  
kitchen and raised a sharp knife, speaki
ng aloud the incantation he had memorized. 
 
ﬁCamiach, Eomiahe, Emial, Macbal, Emoii, Zazean . . . by the most holy names of the 
angels in the Book of Assamaian, I conjure th
ee that thou assist me 
in this operation by 
the power of the One True God.ﬂ
 
 
Andros now lowered the knife and carefully 
pierced the large vein on the right wing of 
the panicked bird. The crow began to blee
d. As he watched the stream of red liquid 
flowing down into the metal cup he had placed 
as a receptacle, he felt an unexpected chill 
in the air. Nonetheless, he continued. 
 
ﬁAlmighty Adonai, Arathron, Ashai, Elohim, El
ohi, Elion, Asher Eheieh, Shaddai . . . be 
my aid, so that this blood may have power and 
efficacy in all wherein 
I shall wish, and in 
all that I shall demand.ﬂ
 
 
That night, he dreamed of birds . . . of a 
giant phoenix rising from a billowing fire. The 
next morning, he awoke with an energy he
 had not felt since ch
ildhood. He went running 
in the park, faster and farther than he™d im
agined possible. When he could run no longer, 
he stopped to do pushups and sit-ups. Coun
tless repetitions. Still he had energy. 
 
That night, again, he dreamed of the phoenix. 
 
Autumn had fallen again on Central Park, and th
e wildlife were scu
rrying about searching 
for food for winter. Andros despised the col
d, and yet his carefully hidden traps were 
now overflowing with live rats and squirre
ls. He took them home in his backpack, 
performing rituals of increasing complexity. 
 
Emanual, Massiach, Yod, He, Vaud . . . please find me worthy.
 
 
The blood rituals fueled his vitality. Andros
 felt younger every day. He continued to read 
day and nightŠancient mystical texts, epic
 medieval poems, the early philosophersŠand 
the more he learned about the true nature of 
things, the more he rea
lized that all hope for 
mankind was lost. 
They are blind . . . wandering aimle
ssly in a world they will never 
understand.
 
 
Andros was still a man, but he sensed he was evolving into something else. Something 
greater. 
Something sacred
. His massive physique had emerged from dormancy, more 
powerful now than ever before. He 
finally understood its true purpose. 
My body is but a 
vessel for my most potent treasure . . . my mind.
 
 
Andros knew his true potential had not ye
t been realized, and 
he delved deeper. 
What is 
my destiny?
 All the ancient text
s spoke of good and  
evil . . . and of man™s need to choose between them. 
I made my choice long ago,
 he knew, 
and yet he felt no remorse. 
What is evil, if not a natural law?
 Darkness followed light. 
Chaos followed order. Entropy was fundament
al. Everything decayed. The perfectly 
ordered crystal eventually turned
 into random par
ticles of dust. 
 
There are those who create . . . and those who destroy.
 
 
It was not until Andros read John Milton™s 
Paradise Lost
 that he saw his destiny 
materialize before him. He read of the gr
eat fallen angel . . . the warrior demon who 
fought against the light . . . the vali
ant one . . . the angel called Moloch. 
 
Moloch walked the earth as a god
. The angel™s name, Andros later learned, when 
translated to the ancient tongue, became Mal™akh. 
 
And so shall I.
 
 
Like all great transformations, this one had to 
begin with a sacrifice . . . but not of rats, 
nor birds. No, this transformation required a 
true
 sacrifice. 
 
There is but one worthy sacrifice.
 
 
Suddenly he had a sense of clarity unlike anyt
hing he had ever experienced in his life. 
His entire destiny had materialized. For three 
straight days he sketched on an enormous 
sheet of paper. When he was done, he had cr
eated a blueprint of what he would become. 
 
He hung the life-size sketch on his wall and 
gazed into it as 
if into a mirror. 
 
I am a masterpiece.
 
 
The next day, he took his drawing to the tattoo parlor. 
 
He was ready. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 78 
 
 
 
The George Washington
 Masonic Memorial stands atop 
Shuter™s Hill 
in Alexandria, 
Virginia. Built in three distinct tiers of in
creasing architectural complexity from bottom 
to topŠDoric, Ionic, and Corint
hianŠthe structure stands as
 a physical symbol of man™s 
intellectual ascent. Inspired by the ancient Ph
aros lighthouse of Al
exandria, Egypt, this 
soaring tower is capped by an Egyptia
n pyramid with a flamelike finial. 
 
Inside the spectacular marble foyer sits a ma
ssive bronze of George Washington in full 
Masonic regalia, along with the ac
tual trowel he used to lay 
the cornerstone of the Capitol 
Building. Above the foyer, nine different levels bear names like the Grotto, the Crypt 
Room, and the Knights Templar Chapel. Amon
g the treasures housed within these spaces 
are over twenty thousand volumes of Masonic 
writings, a dazzling re
plica of the Ark of 
the Covenant, and even a scale model of the throne room in King Solomon™s Temple. 
 
CIA agent Simkins checked his watch as the modified UH-60 chopper skimmed in low 
over the Potomac. 
Six minutes until their train arrives.
 He exhaled and gazed out the 
window at the shining Masonic Memorial on th
e horizon. He had to admit, the brilliantly 
shining tower was as impressive as any bu
ilding on the National Mall. Simkins had never 
been inside the memorial, and tonight woul
d be no different. If all went according to 
plan, Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon 
would never make it out of the subway 
station. 
 
ﬁOver there!ﬂ Simkins shouted to the pilot,
 pointing down at the King Street subway 
station across from the memorial. The pilo
t banked the helicopter and set it down on a 
grassy area at the foot of Shuter™s Hill. 
 
Pedestrians looked up in surprise as Simkin
s and his team piled out, dashed across the 
street, and ran down into Ki
ng Street Station. In the st
airwell, several departing 
passengers leaped out of the way, plastering 
themselves to the walls as the phalanx of 
armed men in black thundered past them. 
 
The King Street Station was larger than Si
mkins had anticipated, 
apparently serving 
several different linesŠBlue, Yellow, and 
Amtrak. He raced over to the Metro map on 
the wall, found Freedom Plaza and th
e direct line to this location. 
 
ﬁBlue Line, southbound platform!ﬂ Simkins shout
ed. ﬁGet down ther
e and clear everyone 
out!ﬂ His team dashed off. 
 
Simkins rushed over to the ticket booth, flas
hed his identification, 
and shouted to the 
woman inside. ﬁThe next train from Metro CenterŠwhat time is it due?!ﬂ 
 
The woman inside looked fright
ened. ﬁI™m not sure. Blue Line arrives every eleven 
minutes. There™s no set schedule.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow long since the last train?ﬂ 
 
ﬁFive . . . six minutes, maybe? No more than that.ﬂ 
 
Turner did the math. 
Perfect
. The next train had to be Langdon™s. 
 
Inside a fast-moving subway car, Katherine 
Solomon shifted uncomfo
rtably on the hard 
plastic seat. The bright fluorescent lights 
overhead hurt her eyes, and she fought the 
impulse to let her eyelids cl
ose, even for a second. Langdon 
sat beside her in the empty 
car, staring blankly down at the 
leather bag at his feet. His ey
elids looked heavy, too, as if 
the rhythmic sway of the moving car
 were lulling him into a trance. 
 
Katherine pictured the stra
nge contents of Langdon™s bag. 
Why does the CIA want this 
pyramid?
 Bellamy had said that Sato might be pursuing the pyramid because she knew its 
true potential. But even if this pyramid somehow 
did
 reveal the hiding place of ancient 
secrets, Katherine found it hard
 to believe that its promise 
of primeval mystical wisdom 
would interest the CIA. 
 
Then again, she reminded herself, the CIA had been caught several times running 
parapsychological or psi programs that bor
dered on ancient magic and mysticism. In 
1995, the ﬁStargate/Scannateﬂ scandal had e
xposed a classified CIA technology called 
remote viewingŠa kind of telepa
thic mind travel that enabled 
a ﬁviewerﬂ to transport his 
mind™s eye to any location on earth and spy th
ere, without being physically present. Of 
course, the technology was nothing new. Mys
tics called it astral projection, and yogis 
called it out-of-body experience.
 Unfortunately, horrified Am
erican taxpayers called it 
absurd,
 and the program had been 
scuttled. At least publicly. 
 
Ironically, Katherine saw remarkable connect
ions between the CIA™
s failed programs and 
her own breakthroughs in Noetic Science. 
 
Katherine felt eager to call the police and fi
nd out if they had discovered anything in 
Kalorama Heights, but she and Langdon we
re phoneless now, and making contact with 
the authorities would probably be a mistake 
anyway; there was no te
lling how far Sato™s 
reach extended. 
 
Patience, Katherine.
 Within minutes, they would be in
 a safe hiding place, guests of a 
man who had assured them he could provide
 answers. Katherine hoped his answers, 
whatever they might be, would 
help her save her brother. 
 
ﬁRobert?ﬂ she whispered, glancing up at 
the subway map. ﬁNext stop is ours.ﬂ 
 
Langdon emerged slowly from his daydream. ﬁR
ight, thanks.ﬂ As the train rumbled 
toward the station, he collected his daybag 
and gave Katherine an uncertain glance. 
ﬁLet™s just hope our ar
rival is uneventful.ﬂ 
 
By the time Turner Simkins dashed down to join his men, the subway platform had been 
entirely cleared, and his team was fanning 
out, taking up positions behind the support 
pillars that ran the length of the platform. 
A distant rumble echoed in the tunnel at the 
other end of the platform, and as it grew l
ouder, Simkins felt the push of stale warm air 
billowing around him. 
 
No escape, Mr. Langdon.
 
 
Simkins turned to the two agents he had told
 to join him on the pl
atform. ﬁIdentification 
and weapons out. These trains are automate
d, but they all have a conductor who opens 
the doors. Find him.ﬂ 
 
The train™s headlamp now appeared down the 
tunnel, and the sound of squealing brakes 
pierced the air. As the train burst into th
e station and began slowing down, Simkins and 
his two agents leaned out over the track, wa
ving CIA identification badges and straining 
to make eye contact with the conduc
tor before he could open the doors. 
 
The train was closing fast. In the third car, Si
mkins finally saw the startled face of the 
conductor, who was apparently trying to fi
gure out why three men in black were all 
waving identification badges at
 him. Simkins jogged toward the train, which was now 
nearing a full stop. 
 
ﬁCIA!ﬂ Simkins shouted, holding up his ID
. ﬁDo NOT open the doors!ﬂ As the train 
glided slowly past him, he went toward the 
conductor™s car, shouti
ng in at him. ﬁDo not 
open your doors! Do you understa
nd?! Do NOT open your doors!ﬂ 
 
The train came to a full stop, its wide-e
yed conductor nodding 
repeatedly. ﬁWhat™s 
wrong?!ﬂ the man demanded through his side window. 
 
ﬁDon™t let this train move,ﬂ Simk
ins said. ﬁAnd don™t open the doors.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCan you let us into the first car?ﬂ 
 
The conductor nodded. Looking fearful, he step
ped out of the train, closing the door 
behind him. He escorted Simkins and his men to the first car, where he manually opened 
the door. 
 
ﬁLock it behind us,ﬂ Simkins said, pulling 
his weapon. Simkins and his men stepped 
quickly into the stark light of the first 
car. The conductor locked
 the door behind them. 
 
The first car contained only four passenge
rsŠthree teenage boys and an old womanŠall 
of whom looked understandably startled to s
ee three armed men entering. Simkins held 
up his ID. ﬁEverything™s fine. Just stay seated.ﬂ 
 
Simkins and his men now began their sweep, pus
hing toward the back of the sealed train 
one car at a timeŠﬁsqueezing toothpaste,ﬂ as
 it was called during his training at the 
Farm. Very few passengers were on this train, 
and halfway to the back, the agents still 
had seen nobody even remotely resembling the description of Robert Langdon and 
Katherine Solomon. Nonetheless, Simkins rema
ined confident. There was absolutely no 
place to hide on a subway car. No bathrooms, no 
storage, and no alternat
ive exits. Even if 
the targets had seen them board the train 
and fled to the back, there was no way out. 
Prying open a door was almost 
impossible, and Simkins had men watching the platform 
and both sides of the train anyway. 
 
Patience.
 
 
By the time Simkins reached the second-to-las
t car, however, he was feeling edgy. This 
penultimate car had only one passengerŠa 
Chinese man. Simkins and his agents moved 
through, scanning for any place to hide. There was none. 
 
ﬁLast car,ﬂ Simkins said, raising his w
eapon as the threesome moved toward the 
threshold of the train™s final section. As they 
stepped into the last 
car, all three of them 
immediately stopped and stared. 
 
What the . . . ?!
 Simkins raced to the rear of the de
serted cabin, searching behind all the 
seats. He spun back to his men, blood boiling. ﬁWhere the hell did they go?!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 79 
 
 
 
Eight miles
 due north of Alexandria, Virginia, 
Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon 
strode calmly across a wide expanse of frost-covered lawn. 
 
ﬁYou should be an actress,ﬂ Langdon said, stil
l impressed by Katherine™s quick thinking 
and improvisational skills. 
 
ﬁYou weren™t half bad yourself.ﬂ She gave him a smile. 
 
At first, Langdon had been mystified by Kath
erine™s abrupt antics in the taxi. Without 
warning, she had suddenly demanded they go 
to Freedom Plaza based on some revelation 
about a Jewish star and the Great Seal of
 the United States. She drew a well-known 
conspiracy-theory image on a 
dollar bill and then insisted Langdon look closely where 
she was 
pointing
. 
 
Finally, Langdon realized that Katherine was pointing 
not
 at the dollar bill but at a tiny 
indicator bulb on the back of the driver™s s
eat. The bulb was so covered with grime that 
he had not even noticed it. As he leaned fo
rward, however, he could see that the bulb was 
illuminated, emitting a dull red glow. He could 
also see the two faint words directly 
beneath the lit bulb. 
 
Š
INTERCOM ON
Š 
 
Startled, Langdon glanced back at Katherine, 
whose frantic eyes were urging him to look 
into the front seat. He obeyed, stealing a disc
reet glance through the divider. The cabby™s 
cell phone was on the dash, wide open, illumi
nated, facing the intercom speaker. An 
instant later, Langdon unders
tood Katherine™s actions. 
 
They know we™re in this cab . . 
. they™ve been listening to us.
 
 
Langdon had no idea how much time he and Katherine had until their taxi was stopped 
and surrounded, but he knew they had to ac
t fast. Instantly, he™d begun playing along, 
realizing that Katherine™s desire to go 
to Freedom Plaza had nothing to do with the 
pyramid but rather with its being a larg
e subway stationŠMetro
 CenterŠfrom which 
they could take the Red, Blue, or Orange 
lines in any of six different directions. 
 
They jumped out of the taxi at Freedom Plaza, and Langdon took over, doing some 
improvising of his own, leaving a 
trail to the Masonic Memorial
 in Alexandria before he 
and Katherine ran down into the subway stat
ion, dashing past the Blue Line platforms 
and continuing on to the Red Line, where they
 caught a train in the opposite direction. 
 
Traveling six stops northbound to Tenleytow
n, they emerged all alone into a quiet, 
upscale neighborhood. Their destinat
ion, the tallest structure for miles, was immediately 
visible on the horizon, just o
ff Massachusetts Avenue on a vast expanse of manicured 
lawn. 
 
Now ﬁoff the grid,ﬂ as Katherin
e called it, the two of them wa
lked across the damp grass. 
On their right was a medieval-style garde
n, famous for its ancient rosebushes and 
Shadow House gazebo. They moved past the 
garden, directly toward the magnificent 
building to which they had been summoned. 
A refuge containing te
n stones from Mount 
Sinai, one from heaven itself, and one 
with the visage of Luke™s dark father
. 
 
ﬁI™ve never been here at night
,ﬂ Katherine said, gazing up at 
the brightly lit towers. ﬁIt™s 
spectacular.ﬂ 
 
Langdon agreed, having forgotten how impressive
 this place truly was. This neo-Gothic 
masterpiece stood at the north end of Embassy 
Row. He hadn™t been here for years, not 
since writing a piece about it for a kids™ 
magazine in hopes of generating some 
excitement among young Americans to come see this amazing landmark. His articleŠ
ﬁMoses, Moon Rocks, and 
Star Wars
ﬂŠhad been part of the tour
ist literature for years. 
 
Washington National Cathedral,
 Langdon thought, feeling an 
unexpected anticipation at 
being back after all these years. 
Where better to ask about One True God?
 
 
ﬁThis cathedral 
really
 has ten stones from Mount Sina
i?ﬂ Katherine asked, gazing up at 
the twin bell towers.  
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁNear the main altar. They sy
mbolize the Ten Commandments given to 
Moses on Mount Sinai.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd there™s a lunar rock?ﬂ 
 
A rock from heaven itself.
 ﬁYes. One of the stained-gla
ss windows is called the Space 
Window and has a fragment of mo
on rock embedded in it.ﬂ  
 
ﬁOkay, but you can™t be serious about the last 
thing.ﬂ Katherine glan
ced over, her pretty 
eyes flashing skepticism. ﬁA statue of . . . Darth Vader?ﬂ 
 
Langdon chuckled. ﬁLuke Skywalker™s dark fa
ther? Absolutely. Vader is one of the 
National Cathedral™s most popular grotesques.
ﬂ He pointed high into the west towers. 
ﬁTough to see him at ni
ght, but he™s there.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat in the world is Darth Vader do
ing on Washington National Cathedral?ﬂ 
 
ﬁA contest for kids to carve a gargoyle th
at depicted the face of evil. Darth won.ﬂ 
 
They reached the grand staircase to the main 
entrance, which was set back in an eighty-
foot archway beneath a breathtaking rose
 window. As they began climbing, Langdon™s 
mind shifted to the mysterious stranger who had called him. 
No names, please . . . Tell 
me, have you successfully protected the map that was entrusted to you?
 Langdon™s 
shoulder ached from carrying the heavy stone pyramid, and he was looking forward to 
setting it down. 
Sanctuary and answers.
 
 
As they approached the top of the stairs, th
ey were met with an imposing pair of wooden 
doors. ﬁDo we just knock?ﬂ Katherine asked. 
 
Langdon had been wondering the same thing, 
except that now one of the doors was 
creaking open. 
 
ﬁWho™s there?ﬂ a frail voice said. The face of
 a withered old man appeared in the 
doorway. He wore priest™s robes and a bla
nk stare. His eyes were opaque and white, 
clouded with cataracts. 
 
ﬁMy name is Robert Langdon,ﬂ he replied. 
ﬁKatherine Solomon 
and I are seeking 
sanctuary.ﬂ 
 
The blind man exhaled in relief. 
ﬁThank God. I™ve been expecting you.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 80 
 
 
 
Warren Bellamy
 felt a sudden ray of hope. 
 
Inside the Jungle, Director Sa
to had just received a phone cal
l from a field agent and had 
immediately flown into a tirade. ﬁWell, you damn well 
better
 find them!ﬂ she shouted 
into her phone. ﬁWe™re running out of time!
ﬂ She had hung up and was now stalking back 
and forth in front of Bellamy as if 
trying to decide what to do next. 
 
Finally, she stopped directly in
 front of him and turned. ﬁMr. Bellamy, I™m going to ask 
you this once, and only once.ﬂ She stared d
eep into his eyes. ﬁYes or noŠdo you have 
any idea where Robert Langdon might have gone?ﬂ 
 
Bellamy had more than a good idea, but he shook his head. ﬁNo.ﬂ 
 
Sato™s piercing gaze had never left his eyes. 
ﬁUnfortunately, part of my job is to know 
when people are lying.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy averted his eyes. ﬁSorry, I can™t help you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁArchitect Bellamy,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁtonight just
 after seven P.M., you 
were having dinner in 
a restaurant outside the city when you rece
ived a phone call from a man who told you he 
had kidnapped Peter Solomon.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy felt an instant chill and returned his eyes to hers. 
How could you possibly know 
that?!
 
 
ﬁThe man,ﬂ Sato continued, ﬁtold you that 
he had sent Robert Langdon to the Capitol 
Building and given Langdon a task to co
mplete . . . a task that required 
your
 help. He 
warned that if Langdon failed in this ta
sk, your friend Peter Solomon would die. 
Panicked, you called all of Peter™s numbers 
but failed to reach him. Understandably, you 
then raced to the Capitol.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy could not imagine how Sato knew about this phone call. 
 
ﬁAs you fled the Capitol,ﬂ Sato said behind th
e smoldering tip of he
r cigarette, ﬁyou sent 
a text message to Solomon™s kidnapper, assuring him that you and Langdon had been 
successful in obtaining the Masonic Pyramid.ﬂ 
 
Where is she getting her information?
 Bellamy wondered
. Not even Langdon knows I 
sent that text message.
 Immediately after entering the tunnel  
to the Library of Congress, Bellamy had ste
pped into the electrical 
room to plug in the 
construction lighting. In the privacy of that 
moment, he had decided to send a quick text 
message to Solomon™s captor, telling him a
bout Sato™s involvement
, but reassuring him 
that heŠBellamyŠand Langdon had obtained th
e Masonic Pyramid and would indeed 
cooperate with his demands. It was a lie, of
 course, but Bellamy hoped the reassurance 
might buy time, both for Peter Solom
on and also to hide the pyramid. 
 
ﬁWho told you I sent a text?ﬂ Bellamy demanded. 
 
Sato tossed Bellamy™s cell phone on the bench 
next to him. ﬁHardly rocket science.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy now remembered his phone and keys had been taken from him by the agents 
who captured him. 
 
ﬁAs for the rest of my inside information,ﬂ Sa
to said, ﬁthe Patriot Act gives me the right 
to place a wiretap on the phone of anyone I consid
er a viable threat to
 national security. I 
consider Peter Solomon to be such a 
threat, and last night I took action.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy could barely get his mind around wh
at she was telling him. ﬁYou™re tapping 
Peter Solomon™s phone?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes. This is how I knew the kidnapper calle
d you at the restaurant. You called Peter™s 
cell phone and left an anxious message 
explaining what had just happened.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy realized she was right. 
 
ﬁWe had also intercepted a call from Robe
rt Langdon, who was in the Capitol Building, 
deeply confused to learn he had been tricked 
into coming there. I went to the Capitol at 
once, arriving before you because I was closer
. As for how I knew to check the X-ray of 
Langdon™s bag . . . in light of my realizati
on that Langdon was involve
d in all of this, I 
had my staff reexamine a seemingly innoc
uous early-morning call between Langdon and 
Peter Solomon™s cell phone, in which the ki
dnapper, posing as Solomon™s assistant, 
persuaded Langdon to come for a lecture and also
 to bring a small package that Peter had 
entrusted to him. When Langdon was not forthc
oming with me about the package he was 
carrying, I requested th
e X-ray of his bag.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy could barely think. Admittedly, everything Sato was saying was feasible, and 
yet something was not adding up. ﬁBut . . . 
how could you possibly think Peter Solomon 
is a threat to national security?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBelieve me, Peter Solomon 
is
 a serious national-security
 threat,ﬂ she snapped. ﬁAnd 
frankly, Mr. Bellamy, so are 
you
.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy sat bolt upright, the handcuffs chafing 
against his wrists. ﬁI beg your pardon?!ﬂ 
 
She forced a smile. ﬁYou Masons play a risky game. You keep a very, 
very
 dangerous 
secret.ﬂ 
 
Is she talking about th
e Ancient Mysteries?
 
 
ﬁThankfully, you™ve always done a good 
job of keeping your secrets hidden. 
Unfortunately, recently you™ve been careless, 
and tonight, your most dangerous secret is 
about to be unveiled to the world. And unless we can stop that from
 happening, I assure 
you the results will be catastrophic.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy stared in bewilderment. 
 
ﬁIf you had not attacked me,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁyou 
would have realized that you and I are on 
the same team.ﬂ 
 
The same team.
 The words sparked in Bellamy an idea that seemed almost impossible to 
fathom. 
Is Sato a member of Eastern Star?
 The Order of the Eastern StarŠoften 
considered a sister organization to the MasonsŠembraced a similar mystical philosophy 
of benevolence, secret wisdom, 
and spiritual open-mindedness. 
The same team? I™m in 
handcuffs! She™s tapping Peter™s phone!
 
 
ﬁYou will help me stop this man,ﬂ Sato sai
d. ﬁHe has the potential to bring about a 
cataclysm from which this country might
 not recover.ﬂ Her face was like stone. 
 
ﬁThen why aren™t you 
tracking
 him?ﬂ 
 
Sato looked incredulous. ﬁDo you think I™m not 
trying
? My trace on Solomon™s cell 
phone went dead before we got a location. Hi
s other number appears to be a disposable 
phoneŠwhich is almost impossible to track. 
The private-jet company told us that 
Langdon™s flight was booked by Solomon™s a
ssistant, on Solomon™s cell phone, with 
Solomon™s Marquis Jet card. There is no trail. 
Not that it matters anyway. Even if we find 
out exactly where he is, I can™t possibly risk moving in and trying to grab him.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhy not?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™d prefer not to share that, as the informa
tion is classified,ﬂ Sato
 said, patience clearly 
waning. ﬁI am asking you to trust me on this.ﬂ  
 
ﬁWell, I don™t!ﬂ  
 
Sato™s eyes were like ice. She turned s
uddenly and shouted across the Jungle. ﬁAgent 
Hartmann! The briefcase, please.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy heard the hiss of the electronic door, an
d an agent strode into the Jungle. He was 
carrying a sleek titanium briefcase, which he
 set on the ground besi
de the OS director. 
 
ﬁLeave us,ﬂ Sato said. 
 
As the agent departed, the door hissed 
again, and then everything fell silent. 
 
Sato picked up the metal case, laid it acr
oss her lap, and popped the clasps. Then she 
raised her eyes slowly to Bellamy. ﬁI did not 
want to do this, but our time is running out, 
and you™ve left me no choice.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy eyed the strange brief
case and felt a swell of fear. 
Is she going to torture me?
 He 
strained at his cuffs again. ﬁWhat™s in that case?!ﬂ 
 
Sato smiled grimly. ﬁSomething that
 will persuade you to see things 
my
 way. I guarantee 
it.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 81 
 
 
 
The subterranean
 space in which Mal™akh performe
d the Art was ingeniously hidden. 
His home™s basement, to those who entered, appe
ared quite normalŠa 
typical cellar with 
boiler, fuse box, woodpile, and a hodgepodge of 
storage. This visi
ble cellar, however, 
was only a portion of Mal™akh™s underground sp
ace. A sizable area had been walled off 
for his clandestine practices. 
 
Mal™akh™s private work space was a suite of
 small rooms, each with a specialized 
purpose. The area™s sole entrance was a steep
 ramp secretly accessible through his living 
room, making the area™s discovery virtually impossible. 
 
Tonight, as Mal™akh descended the ramp, the ta
ttooed sigils and signs on his flesh seemed 
to come alive in the cerulean glow of his 
basement™s specialized 
lighting. Moving into 
the bluish haze, he walked past several closed doors and headed di
rectly for the largest 
room at the end of the corridor. 
 
The ﬁsanctum sanctorum,ﬂ as Mal™akh liked to
 call it, was a perfect
 twelve-foot square. 
Twelve are the signs of the zodiac. Twelve ar
e the hours of the day. 
Twelve are the gates 
of heaven.
 In the center of the chamber was a 
stone table, a seven-by-seven square. 
Seven 
are the seals of Revelation. Seven are the steps of the Temple.
 Centered over the table 
hung a carefully calibrated light source that cycled through a spectrum of preordained 
colors, completing its cycle every six hours in
 accordance with the sacred Table of 
Planetary Hours. 
The hour of Yanor is blue. The hour 
of Nasnia is red. The hour of Salam 
is white.
 
 
Now was the hour of Caerra, meaning the light
 in the room had modulated to a soft 
purplish hue. Wearing only a silken loincloth wrapped around his buttocks and neutered 
sex organ, Mal™akh bega
n his preparations. 
 
He carefully combined the suffumigation chemi
cals that he would late
r ignite to sanctify 
the air. Then he folded the vi
rgin silk robe that he would 
eventually don in place of his 
loincloth. And finally, he purified a flask of 
water for the anointing of his offering. When 
he was done, he placed all of these pr
epared ingredients on a side table. 
 
Next he went to a shelf and retrieved a small ivory box, which he carried to the side table 
and placed with the other items. Although he 
was not yet ready to use it, he could not 
resist opening the lid and admiring this treasure. 
 
The knife.
 
 
Inside the ivory box, nestled in 
a cradle of black velvet, shon
e the sacrificia
l knife that 
Mal™akh had been saving for tonight. He ha
d purchased it for $1.6 million on the Middle 
Eastern antiquities blac
k market last year. 
 
The most famous knife in history.
 
 
Unimaginably old and believed lost, this preci
ous blade was made of
 iron, attached to a 
bone handle. Over the ages, it had been 
in the possession of countless powerful 
individuals. In recent decad
es, however, it had disappear
ed, languishing in a secret 
private collection. Mal™akh had gone to enor
mous lengths to obtai
n it. The knife, he 
suspected, had not drawn blood for decades . . . possibly centuries. Tonight, this blade 
would again taste the power of th
e sacrifice for which it was honed. 
 
Mal™akh gently lifted the knife from its cushioned compartment and reverently polished 
the blade with a silk cloth soaked in purif
ied water. His skills had progressed greatly 
since his first rudimentary experiments in
 New York. The dark Art that Mal™akh 
practiced had been known by many names in 
many languages, but by any name, it was a 
precise science. This primeval technology had 
once held the key to the portals of power, 
but it had been banished long ago, relegated 
to the shadows of occultism and magic. 
Those few who still practiced this Art we
re considered madmen, but Mal™akh knew 
better. 
This is not work for those with dull faculties.
 The ancient dark Art, like modern 
science, was a discipline involving precise fo
rmulas, specific ingredients, and meticulous 
timing. 
 
This Art was not the impotent black magic of
 today, often practiced halfheartedly by 
curious souls. This Art, like nuclear phys
ics, had the potential to unleash enormous 
power. The warnings were dire: 
The unskilled practitioner runs
 the risk of being struck 
by a reflux current and destroyed.
 
 
Mal™akh finished admiring the sacred blade a
nd turned his attention 
to a lone sheet of 
thick vellum lying on the table before him. 
He had made this vellum himself from the 
skin of a baby lamb. As was the protocol, 
the lamb was pure, having not yet reached 
sexual maturity. Beside the vellum was a quill
 pen he had made from the feather of a 
crow, a silver saucer, and three glimmeri
ng candles arranged around a solid-brass bowl. 
The bowl contained one inch
 of thick crimson liquid. 
 
The liquid was Peter Solomon™s blood. 
 
Blood is the tincture of eternity.
 
 
Mal™akh picked up the quill pen, placed his 
left hand on the vellum, and dipping the quill 
tip in the blood, he carefully traced the outli
ne of his open palm. When he was done, he 
added the five symbols of the Ancient Myst
eries, one on each fingertip of the drawing. 
 
The crown . . . to represent the king I shall become.
 
 
The star . . . to represent the he
avens which have or
dained my destiny.
 
 
The sun . . . to represent th
e illumination of my soul.
 
 
The lantern . . . to represent th
e feeble light of human understanding.
 
 
And the key . . . to represent the missing piece, 
that which tonight I shall at last possess.
 
 
Mal™akh completed his blood tracing and held 
up the vellum, admiring his work in the 
light of the three candles. He waited until th
e blood was dry and then folded the thick 
vellum three times. While chanting an ether
eal ancient incantation, 
Mal™akh touched the 
vellum to the third candle, and it burst into flames. He set the flaming vellum on the 
silver saucer and let it burn. 
As it did, the carbon in the 
animal skin dissolved to a 
powdery black char. When the flame went out
, Mal™akh carefully tapped the ashes into 
the brass bowl of blood. Then he stirred 
the mixture with the crow™s feather. 
 
The liquid turned a deeper
 crimson, nearly black. 
 
Holding the bowl in both palms, Mal™akh ra
ised it over his head and gave thanks, 
intoning the blood 
eukharistos
 of the ancients. Then he 
carefully poured the blackened 
mixture into a glass vial and corked it. This
 would be the ink with
 which Mal™akh would 
inscribe the untattooed flesh atop his 
head and complete his masterpiece. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 82 
 
 
 
Washington National
 Cathedral is the sixth-largest cathedral in the world and soars 
higher than a thirty-story skyscraper. Em
bellished with over two hundred stained-glass 
windows, a fifty-three-bell cari
llon, and a 10,647-pipe organ, th
is Gothic masterpiece can 
accommodate more than three thousand worshippers. 
 
Tonight, however, the great
 cathedral was deserted. 
 
Reverend Colin GallowayŠdean of the cathedra
lŠlooked like he had 
been alive forever. 
Stooped and withered, he wore a simple black 
cassock and shuffled blindly ahead without 
a word. Langdon and Katherine followed in si
lence through the darkness of the four-
hundred-foot-long nave™s central aisle, which was 
curved ever so slightly to the left to 
create a softening optical illusion. When 
they reached the Great Crossing, the dean 
guided them through the rood screenŠthe symb
olic divider between the public area and 
the sanctuary beyond. 
 
The scent of frankincense hung in the air of
 the chancel. This sacred space was dark, 
illuminated only by indirect reflections in the foliated vaults overhead. Flags of the fifty 
states hung above the quire, which was ornate
ly appointed with several carved reredos 
depicting biblical events. D
ean Galloway continued on, apparently knowing this walk by 
heart. For a moment, Langdon thought
 they were headed straight for the high altar, where 
the ten stones from Mount Sinai were embedded,
 but the old dean finally turned left and 
groped his way through a discr
eetly hidden door that led into
 an administrative annex. 
 
They moved down a short hallway to an 
office door bearing a brass nameplate: 
THE REVEREND DR. COLIN GALLOWAY
 
CATHEDRAL DEAN
 
 
Galloway opened the door and turned on the lights, apparently accustomed to 
remembering this courtesy for his guests. 
He ushered them in and closed the door. 
 
The dean™s office was small but elegant, w
ith high bookshelves, a desk, a carved armoire, 
and a private bathroom. On the walls hung si
xteenth-century tapestries and several 
religious paintings. The old dean motioned to 
the two leather chairs directly opposite his 
desk. Langdon sat with Katherine and felt gratef
ul finally to set his heavy shoulder bag 
on the floor at his feet. 
 
Sanctuary and answers,
 Langdon thought, settling into the comfortable chair. 
 
The aged man shuffled around behind his desk
 and eased himself down into his high-
backed chair. Then, with a weary sigh, he ra
ised his head, staring blankly out at them 
through clouded eyes. When he spoke, hi
s voice was unexpectedly
 clear and strong. 
 
ﬁI realize we have never met,ﬂ the old ma
n said, ﬁand yet I feel I know you both.ﬂ He 
took out a handkerchief and dabbed his mouth. ﬁProfessor Langdon, I am familiar with 
your writings, including the clever piece you di
d on the symbolism of this cathedral. And, 
Ms. Solomon, your brother, Peter, and I ha
ve been Masonic brothers for many years 
now.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter is in terrible trouble,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
ﬁSo I have been told.ﬂ The old man sighe
d. ﬁAnd I will do everything in my power to 
help you.ﬂ 
 
Langdon saw no Masonic ring on the dean™s 
finger, and yet he knew many Masons, 
especially those within the clergy, chos
e not to advertise their affiliation. 
 
As they began to talk, it became clear th
at Dean Galloway already knew some of the 
night™s events from Warren Bellamy™s phone
 message. As Langdon and Katherine filled 
him in on the rest, the dean looked more and more troubled. 
 
ﬁAnd this man who has taken our beloved Pe
ter,ﬂ the dean said, ﬁhe is insisting you 
decipher the pyramid in exchange for Peter™s life?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁHe thinks it™s a map th
at will lead him to the hiding place of the 
Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
The dean turned his eerie, opaque eyes toward Langdon. ﬁMy ears tell me you do not 
believe in such things.ﬂ 
 
Langdon did not want to waste 
time going down this road. ﬁIt doesn™t matter what I 
believe. We need to help Peter. Unfort
unately, when we deciphered the pyramid, it 
pointed nowhere.ﬂ 
 
The old man sat straighter. ﬁYou™ve 
deciphered
 the pyramid?ﬂ 
 
Katherine interceded now, quickly explaini
ng that despite Bellamy™s warnings and her 
brother™s request that Langdon not
 unwrap the package, she ha
d done so, feeling her first 
priority was to help her brother however sh
e could. She told the dean about the golden 
capstone, Albrecht Dürer™s magic square, and 
how it decrypted the si
xteen-letter Masonic 
cipher into the phrase 
Jeova Sanctus Unus.
 
 
ﬁThat™s all it says?ﬂ the d
ean asked. ﬁOne True God?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, sir,ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁApparen
tly the pyramid is more of a 
metaphorical
 map 
than a geographic one.ﬂ 
 
The dean held out his ha
nds. ﬁLet me feel it.ﬂ 
 
Langdon unzipped his bag and pulled out the py
ramid, which he carefully hoisted up on 
the desk, setting it directly in front of the reverend. 
 
Langdon and Katherine watched as the old man™s 
frail hands examined every inch of the 
stoneŠthe engraved side, the smooth base, a
nd the truncated top. Wh
en he was finished, 
he held out his hands 
again. ﬁAnd the capstone?ﬂ 
 
Langdon retrieved the small stone box, set it 
on the desk, and opened the lid. Then he 
removed the capstone and placed it into the old man™s waiting hands. The dean 
performed a similar examination, feeli
ng every inch, pausing on the capstone™s 
engraving, apparently having so
me trouble reading the small,
 elegantly inscribed text. 
 
ﬁ‚The secret hides within The Order,™ﬂ Langdon offered. ﬁAnd the words 
the
 and 
order
 
are capitalized.ﬂ 
 
The old man™s face was expressionless as he
 positioned the capstone on top of the 
pyramid and aligned it by sense of touch. He se
emed to pause a moment, as if in prayer, 
and reverently ran his palms over the comple
te pyramid several times. Then he reached 
out and located the cube-shaped box, taking it in
 his hands, feeling it 
carefully, his fingers 
probing inside and out. 
 
When he was done, he set down the box and lean
ed back in his chair. ﬁSo tell me,ﬂ he 
demanded, his voice suddenly stern. ﬁWhy have you come to me?ﬂ 
 
The question took Langdon off guar
d. ﬁWe came, sir, because you 
told
 us to. And Mr. 
Bellamy said we should trust you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd yet you did not trust 
him
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 
 
The dean™s white eyes stared directly
 through Langdon. ﬁThe package containing the 
capstone was sealed. Mr. Bellamy told you 
not
 to open it,  
and yet you did. In addition, Peter Solomon himself told you 
not
 to open it. And yet you 
did.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSir,ﬂ Katherine intervened, ﬁwe were trying 
to help my brother. The man who has him 
demanded we decipherŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI can appreciate that,ﬂ the dean de
clared, ﬁand yet what have you achieved by 
opening
 
the package? Nothing. Peter™s captor is looking for a 
location,
 and he will not be satisfied 
with the answer of 
Jeova Sanctus Unus.
ﬂ 
 
ﬁI agree,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁbut unfortunately th
at™s all the pyramid says. As I mentioned, 
the map seems to be more 
figurative
 thanŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re mistaken, Professor,ﬂ the dean
 said. ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid is a 
real
 map. It 
points to a 
real
 location. You do not understand that, because you have not yet 
deciphered the pyramid fully. Not even close.ﬂ 
 
Langdon and Katherine exchanged startled looks. 
 
The dean laid his hands back on the pyram
id, almost caressing it. ﬁThis map, like the 
Ancient Mysteries themselves, 
has many layers of meaning. It
s true secret remains veiled 
from you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDean Galloway,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁwe™ve been over every inch of the pyramid and 
capstone, and there™s nothing else to see.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot in its current state,
 no. But objects change.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSir?ﬂ 
 
ﬁProfessor, as you know, the promise of this pyr
amid is one of miraculous transformative 
power. Legend holds that this pyramid can change
 its shape . . . alter 
its physical form to 
reveal its secrets. Like the famed stone that
 released Excalibur into the hands of King 
Arthur, the Masonic Pyramid can transform itself 
if it so chooses . . . and reveal its secret 
to the worthy.ﬂ 
 
Langdon now sensed that the old man™s advan
ced years had perhaps robbed him of his 
faculties. ﬁI™m sorry, sir. Are you 
saying this pyramid can undergo a 
literal
 physical 
transformation?ﬂ 
 
ﬁProfessor, if I were to reach out with my 
hand and transform this pyramid right before 
your eyes, would you believe what you had witnessed?ﬂ 
 
Langdon had no idea how to respond. ﬁI suppose I would have no choice.ﬂ 
 
ﬁVery well, then. In a moment, I shall do exac
tly that.ﬂ He dabbed his mouth again. ﬁLet 
me remind you that there was an
 era when even the brightest minds perceived the earth as 
flat. For if the earth were round, then surely
 the oceans would spill o
ff. Imagine how they 
would have mocked you if you proclaimed, ‚Not
 only is the world a 
sphere, but there is 
an invisible, mystical force that
 holds everything to its surface™!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere™s a difference,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁbetween
 the existence of gravity . . . and the 
ability to transform objects 
with a touch of your hand.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIs there? Is it not possible th
at we are still living in the 
Dark Ages, still mocking the 
suggestion of ‚mystical™ forces that we cannot
 see or comprehend. History, if it has taught 
us anything at all, has taught us
 that the strange ideas we deri
de today will one day be our 
celebrated truths. I claim I can transform this 
pyramid with a touch of my finger, and you 
question my sanity. I would expect more from 
an historian. History is replete with great 
minds who have all proclaimed the 
same
 thing . . . great minds w
ho have all insisted that 
man possesses mystical abilities of which he is unaware.ﬂ 
 
Langdon knew the dean was correct. The famous Hermetic aphorismŠ
Know ye not that 
ye are gods?Š
was one of the pillars of the Ancient Mysteries. 
As above, so below . . . 
Man created in God™s image . . . Apotheosis.
 This persistent message of man™s own 
divinityŠof his hidden potentialŠwas 
the
 recurring theme in the ancient texts of 
countless traditions. Even the Holy 
Bible cried out in Psalms 82:6: 
Ye are gods!
 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ the old man said, ﬁI realize that 
you,
 like many educated people, live trapped 
between worldsŠone foot in the spiritual, one foot in the physical. Y
our heart yearns to 
believe . . . but your intellect refuses to permit it. As an academic, you would be wise to 
learn from the great minds of history.ﬂ He
 paused and cleared his throat. ﬁIf I™m 
remembering correctly, one of 
the greatest minds ever to live proclaimed: ‚That which is 
impenetrable to us really exists. Behind the secrets of nature remains something subtle, 
intangible, and inexplicable. Veneration fo
r this force beyond anything that we can 
comprehend is my religion.™ ﬂ 
 
ﬁWho said that?ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁGandhi?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Katherine interjected. ﬁAlbert Einstein.ﬂ 
 
Katherine Solomon had read every word Einste
in had ever written and was struck by his 
profound respect for the mystical, as well as 
his predictions that the masses would one 
day feel the same. 
The religion of the future,
 Einstein had predicted, 
will be a cosmic 
religion. It will transcend personal
 God and avoid dogma and theology.
 
 
Robert Langdon appeared to be struggling with
 the idea. Katherine could sense his rising 
frustration with the old Episc
opal priest, and she understood. Af
ter all, they had traveled 
here for answers, and they had found in
stead a blind man who claimed he could 
transform objects with a touch of his hands
. Even so, the old man™s overt passion for 
mystical forces reminded Katherine of her brother. 
 
ﬁFather Galloway,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁPeter 
is in trouble. The CIA is chasing us. And 
Warren Bellamy sent us to you for help. I don™
t know what this pyramid says or where it 
points, but if deciphering it means that we 
can help Peter, we need to do that. Mr. 
Bellamy may have preferred to sacrifice my brother™s life to hide this pyramid, but my 
family has experienced nothing but pain because
 of it. Whatever secret it may hold, it 
ends tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou are correct,ﬂ the old man 
replied, his tone dire. ﬁIt 
will
 all end tonight. You™ve 
guaranteed that.ﬂ He sighed. ﬁMs. Solomon, 
when you broke the seal
 on that box, you set 
in motion a series of events from which there 
will be no return. There are forces at work 
tonight that you do not yet compre
hend. There is no turning back.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stared dumbfounded at the revere
nd. There was something apocalyptic about 
his tone, as if he were referring to th
e Seven Seals of Revelation or Pandora™s box. 
 
ﬁRespectfully, sir,ﬂ Langdon inte
rceded, ﬁI can™t imagine how
 a stone pyramid could set 
in motion 
anything
 at all.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course you can™t, Professor.ﬂ The old ma
n stared blindly through him. ﬁYou do not 
yet have eyes to see.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 83 
 
 
 
In the
 moist air of the Jungle, the Architect 
of the Capitol could 
feel the sweat now 
rolling down his back. His handcuffed wrists ached, but all of his attention remained 
riveted on the ominous titanium briefcase that Sato had just opened on the bench between 
them. 
 
The contents of this case,
 Sato had told him, 
will persuade you to see things my way. I 
guarantee it.
 
 
The tiny Asian woman had unclasped the metal case 
away
 from Bellamy™s line of sight, 
and he had yet to see its contents, but his 
imagination was running wild. Sato™s hands 
were doing something inside the case, and Bellamy
 half expected her to
 extract a series of 
glistening, razor-sharp tools. 
 
Suddenly a light source flickered inside the 
case, growing brighter, illuminating Sato™s 
face from beneath. Her hands kept moving inside, and the light changed hue. After a few 
moments, she removed her hands, grasped the 
entire case, and turned it toward Bellamy 
so he could see inside. 
 
Bellamy found himself squinting into the glow
 of what appeared to be some kind of 
futuristic laptop with a handheld phone r
eceiver, two antennae, 
and a double keyboard. 
His initial surge of relief 
turned quickly to confusion. 
 
The screen bore the CIA logo and the text: 
 
SECURE LOG-IN 
 
USER: INOUE SATO 
 
SECURITY CLEARANCE: LEVEL 5  
 
Beneath the laptop™s log-in wi
ndow, a progress icon was spinning: 
 
ONE MOMENT PLEASE . . . 
 
DECRYPTING FILE . . .  
 
Bellamy™s gaze shot back up to Sato, whose ey
es were locked on his. ﬁI had not wanted 
to show you this,ﬂ she said. ﬁB
ut you™ve left me no choice.ﬂ 
 
The screen flickered again, and Bellamy gl
anced back down as the file opened, its 
contents filling the entire LCD. 
 
For several moments, Bellamy stared at the sc
reen, trying to make sense of what he was 
looking at. Gradually, as it be
gan to dawn on him, he felt the blood draining from his 
face. He stared in horror, unable 
to look away. ﬁBut this is . . . 
impossible
!ﬂ he exclaimed. 
ﬁHow . . . could this be!ﬂ 
 
Sato™s face was grim. ﬁYou tell 
me,
 Mr. Bellamy. 
You
 tell me.ﬂ 
 
As the Architect of the Capitol began to fu
lly comprehend the ramifications of what he 
was seeing, he could feel his en
tire world teetering precariou
sly on the brink of disaster. 
 
My God . . . I™ve made a te
rrible, terrible mistake!
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 84 
 
 
 
Dean Galloway
 felt alive. 
 
Like all mortals, he knew the time was coming 
when he would shed his mortal shell, but 
tonight was not the night. His 
corporeal heart was beating strong and fast . . . and his 
mind felt sharp. 
There is work to be done.
 
 
As he ran his arthritic hands across the 
pyramid™s smooth surfaces, he could scarcely 
believe what he was feeling. 
I never imagined I would live 
to witness this moment.
 For 
generations, the pieces of the symbolon map had been kept safely apart from one another. 
Now they were united at last. Galloway w
ondered if this was 
the foretold time. 
 
Strangely, fate had selected two non-Masons 
to assemble the pyramid. Somehow, this 
seemed fitting. 
The Mysteries are moving out of the inne
r circles . . . out of darkness . . . 
into the light.
 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ he said, turning his head in th
e direction of Langdon™s breathing. ﬁDid Peter 
tell you 
why
 he wanted you to watc
h over the little package?ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe said powerful people wanted to
 steal it from him,ﬂ Langdon replied. 
 
The dean nodded. ﬁYes, Peter told me the same thing.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe did?ﬂ Katherine said suddenly 
on his left. ﬁYou and my brother 
spoke
 about this 
pyramid?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course,ﬂ Galloway said. ﬁY
our brother and I have spoke
n on many things. I was once 
the Worshipful Master at the House of the 
Temple, and he comes to me for guidance at 
times. It was about a year ago that he came to
 me, deeply troubled. He sat exactly where 
you are now, and he asked me if I believed in supernatural premonitions.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPremonitions?ﬂ Katherine sounded concerned. ﬁYou mean like . . . 
visions
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot exactly. It was more visceral. Peter said
 he was feeling the gr
owing presence of a 
dark force in his life. He sensed something 
was watching him . . . waiting . . . intending to 
do him great harm.ﬂ 
 
ﬁObviously he was right,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁc
onsidering that the same man who killed our 
mother and Peter™s son had come to Washingt
on and become one of Peter™s own Masonic 
brothers.ﬂ 
 
ﬁTrue,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁbut it doesn™t e
xplain the involvement of the CIA.ﬂ 
 
Galloway was not so sure. ﬁMen in power ar
e always interested in greater power.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut . . . the CIA?ﬂ Langdon challenged. ﬁAnd 
mystical secrets? So
mething doesn™t add 
up.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSure it does,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁThe CIA th
rives on technological advancement and has 
always experimented with the mystical 
sciencesŠESP, remote viewing, sensory 
deprivation, pharmacologically i
nduced highly mentalized states
. It™s all the same thingŠ
tapping the unseen potential of the human mind. 
If there™s one thing I™ve learned from 
Peter, it™s this: Science and mysticism are ve
ry closely related, distinguishable only by 
their approaches. They have identical
 goals . . . but different methods.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter tells me,ﬂ Galloway sa
id, ﬁthat your field of study is
 a kind of modern mystical 
science?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNoetics,ﬂ Katherine sai
d, nodding. ﬁAnd it™s proving man has powers unlike anything 
we can imagine.ﬂ She motioned to a stained-
glass window depicting the familiar image of 
the ﬁLuminous Jesus,ﬂ that of Ch
rist with rays of light flow
ing from his head and hands. 
ﬁIn fact, I just used a supercooled charge
-coupled device to phot
ograph the hands of a 
faith healer at work. The photos looked a lot 
like the image of Jesus in your stained-glass 
window . . . streams of energy pouring through the healer™s fingertips.ﬂ 
 
The well-trained mind,
 Galloway thought, hiding a smile. 
How do you think Jesus healed 
the sick?
 
 
ﬁI realize,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁt
hat modern medicine ridicule
s healers and shamans, but I 
saw this with my own eyes. My CCD camera
s clearly photographed th
is man transmitting 
a massive energy field from his fingertips . . 
. and literally changi
ng the cellular makeup 
of his patient. If 
that™s
 not godlike power, then I don™t know what is.ﬂ 
 
Dean Galloway let himself smile. Katherine ha
d the same fiery passion as her brother. 
ﬁPeter once compared Noetic Scientists to
 the early explorers who were mocked for 
embracing the heretical notion of a 
spherical
 earth. Almost overnight, these explorers 
went from fools to heroes, discovering uncha
rted worlds and expanding the horizons of 
everyone on the planet. Peter thinks 
you
 will do this as well. He has very high hopes for 
your work. After all, every great philosophical 
shift in history began with a single bold 
idea.ﬂ 
 
Galloway knew, of course, that one needn™t go 
to a lab to witness proof of this bold new 
idea, this proposal of man™s untapped potential
. This very cathedral 
held healing prayer 
circles for the sick, and rep
eatedly had witnessed truly mi
raculous results, medically 
documented physical transformations. The question was not whether God had imbued 
man with great powers . 
. . but rather how we 
liberate
 those powers. 
 
The old dean placed his hands reverently around the sides of the Masonic Pyramid and 
spoke very quietly. ﬁMy friends, I do not know exactly 
where
 this pyramid points . . . but 
I do know 
this
. There is a great spiritual treasure buried out there somewhere . . . a 
treasure that has waited patiently in darkness fo
r generations. I believe it is a catalyst that 
has the power to transform this world.ﬂ He 
now touched the golden tip of the capstone. 
ﬁAnd now that this pyramid is assembled . 
. . the time is fast 
approaching. And why 
shouldn™t it? The promise of a great transfor
mational enlightenment has been prophesied 
forever.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFather,ﬂ Langdon said, his tone 
challenging, ﬁwe™re all famili
ar with the Revelation of 
Saint John and the literal meaning of the 
Apocalypse, but biblical prophecy hardly 
seemsŠﬂ 
 
ﬁOh, heavens, the Book of Revelation is 
a mess!ﬂ the dean said. ﬁNobody knows how to 
read that. I™m talking about 
clear
 minds writing in clear languageŠthe predictions of 
Saint Augustine, Sir Francis Bacon, Newt
on, Einstein, the list goes on and on, all 
anticipating a transformative moment of 
enlightenment. Even Jesus himself said, 
‚Nothing is hidden that will not be made know
n, nor secret that will not come to light.™ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s a safe prediction to make,ﬂ Lan
gdon said. ﬁKnowledge grows exponentially. The 
more we know, the greater our
 ability to learn, and the 
faster
 we expand our knowledge 
base.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Katherine added. ﬁWe see this in science all the time. Each new technology we 
invent becomes a tool with wh
ich to invent new technologies 
. . . and it snowballs. That™s 
why science has advanced more in the last
 five years than in the previous five 
thousand
. 
Exponential growth. Mathematically, as time 
passes, the exponentia
l curve of progress 
becomes almost vertical, and new development occurs incredibly fast.ﬂ 
 
Silence fell in the dean™s office, and Gallowa
y sensed that his two guests still had no idea 
how this pyramid could possibly help them reveal anything further. 
That is why fate 
brought you to me,
 he thought. 
I have a role to play.
 
 
For many years, the Reverend Colin Gallowa
y, along with his Masonic brothers, had 
played the role of gatek
eeper. Now it was all changing. 
 
I am no longer a gatekeeper . . . I am a guide.
 
 
ﬁProfessor Langdon?ﬂ Galloway said, reaching out across his desk. ﬁTake my hand if you 
will.ﬂ 
 
Robert Langdon felt uncertain as
 he stared across at Dean 
Galloway™s outstretched palm. 
 
Are we going to pray?
 
 
Politely, Langdon reached out and placed his righ
t hand in the dean™s withered hand. The 
old man grasped it firmly but did not begi
n to pray. Instead, he found Langdon™s index 
finger and guided it downward into the 
stone box that had once housed the golden 
capstone. 
 
ﬁYour eyes have blinded you,ﬂ the dean sai
d. ﬁIf you saw with your 
fingertips as I do, 
you would realize this box has something left to teach you.ﬂ 
 
Dutifully, Langdon worked his fingertip around 
the inside of the box, but he felt nothing. 
The inside was perfectly smooth. 
 
ﬁKeep looking,ﬂ Galloway prompted. 
 
Finally, Langdon™s fingertip felt somethingŠa 
tiny raised circleŠa minuscule dot in the 
center of the base of the box. He removed his 
hand and peered inside. The little circle 
was virtually invisible to the naked eye. 
What is that?
 
 
ﬁDo you recognize that symbol?ﬂ Galloway asked. 
 
ﬁSymbol?ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁI can 
barely see anything at all.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPush down on it.ﬂ 
 
Langdon did as he asked, pressing hi
s fingertip down onto the spot. 
What does he think 
will happen?
 
 
ﬁHold your finger down,ﬂ the d
ean said. ﬁApply pressure.ﬂ 
 
Langdon glanced over at Katherine, who looked 
puzzled as she tucked a wisp of hair 
behind her ears. 
 
A few seconds later, the old dean finally
 nodded. ﬁOkay, remove your hand. The alchemy 
is complete.ﬂ 
 
Alchemy?
 Robert Langdon removed his hand from 
the stone box and sat in bewildered 
silence. Nothing had changed at all.
 The box just sat there on the desk. 
 
ﬁNothing,ﬂ Langdon said.  
 
ﬁLook at your fingertip,ﬂ the dean re
plied. ﬁYou should see a transformation.ﬂ 
 
Langdon looked at his finger, but the only tran
sformation he could see was that he now 
had an indentation on his skin made by the ci
rcular nubbinŠa tiny circle with a dot in the 
middle. 
 
 
 
 
 
ﬁ
Now
 do you recognize this symbol?ﬂ the dean asked. 
 
Although Langdon recognized the symbol, he was 
more impressed that the dean had been 
able to feel the detail of it. Seeing with one™s
 fingertips was appare
ntly a learned skill. 
 
ﬁIt™s alchemical,ﬂ Katherin
e said, sliding her chair cl
oser and examining Langdon™s 
finger. ﬁIt™s the ancient symbol for 
gold
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIndeed it is.ﬂ The dean smiled and patted th
e box. ﬁProfessor, congratulations. You have 
just achieved what every alchemist in history 
has strived for. From a worthless substance, 
you™ve created gold.ﬂ 
 
Langdon frowned, unimpressed. The little parlor tr
ick seemed to be no help at all. ﬁAn 
interesting idea, sir, but I™m 
afraid this symbolŠa circle with a round dot in the middleŠ
has dozens of meanings. It™s called a 
circumpunct,
 and it™s one of the most widely used 
symbols in history.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat are you talking about?ﬂ th
e dean asked, sounding skeptical. 
 
Langdon was stunned that a Mason was not more familiar with the spiritual importance 
of this symbol. ﬁSir, the circumpunct has 
countless
 meanings. In ancient Egypt, it was the 
symbol for RaŠthe sun godŠand modern astrono
my still uses it as the solar symbol. In 
Eastern philosophy, it represents 
the spiritual insight of the 
Third Eye, the divine rose, 
and the sign of illumination. The Kabbalists use 
it to symbolize the KetherŠthe highest 
Sephiroth and ‚the most hidde
n of all hidden things.™ Earl
y mystics called it the Eye of 
God and it™s the origin of the All-Seeing Eye on the Great Seal. The Pythagoreans used 
the circumpunct as the symbol of the MonadŠt
he Divine Truth, the Pr
isca Sapientia, the 
at-one-ment of mind and soul, and theŠﬂ 
 
ﬁEnough!ﬂ Dean Galloway was chuckling now. 
ﬁProfessor, thank you. You are correct, 
of course.ﬂ 
 
Langdon now realized he had just been played. 
He knew all that.
 
 
ﬁThe circumpunct,ﬂ Galloway said, still smiling to himself, ﬁis essentially 
the
 symbol of 
the Ancient Mysteries. For this
 reason, I would sugge
st that its presence 
in this box is not 
mere coincidence. Legend holds that the secrets 
of this map are hidden
 in the smallest of 
details.ﬂ 
 
ﬁFine,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁbut even if this 
symbol was inscribed there intentionally, it 
doesn™t bring us any closer to
 deciphering the map, does it?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou mentioned earlier that the wax seal you 
broke was embossed with Peter™s ring?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s correct.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd you said you have that ring with you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI do.ﬂ Langdon reached into his pocket, found 
the ring, took it out of the plastic bag, and 
placed it on the desk in front of the dean. 
 
Galloway picked up the ring and began feeli
ng its surfaces. ﬁThis unique ring was created 
at the same time as the Masonic Pyramid, and 
traditionally, it is worn by the Mason in 
charge of 
protecting
 the pyramid. Tonight, when I felt 
the tiny circumpunct on the bottom 
of the stone box, I realized that the ri
ng is, in fact, part of the symbolon.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt is?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m certain of it. Peter is my closest friend, 
and he wore this ring for many years. I am 
quite familiar with it.ﬂ He handed the ring to Langdon. ﬁSee for yourself.ﬂ 
 
Langdon took the ring and examined it, runn
ing his fingers over the double-headed 
phoenix, the number 33, the words 
ORDO AB CHAO
,
 and also the words 
All is revealed 
at the thirty-third degree
. He felt nothing helpful. Then, as his fingers traced down 
around the outside of the band, he stopped shor
t. Startled, he turn
ed the ring over and 
eyed the very bottom of its band. 
 
ﬁDid you find it?ﬂ Galloway said. 
 
ﬁI think so, yes!ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
Katherine slid her chair closer. ﬁWhat?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe degree sign on the band,ﬂ
 Langdon said, showing her. 
ﬁ
It™s so small that you don™t 
really notice it with your eyes, 
but if you feel it, you can te
ll it™s actually indentedŠlike a 
tiny circular incision.ﬂ The 
degree sign was centered on the 
bottom of the band . . . and 
admittedly looked to be the same size as 
the raised nubbin in the bottom of the cube. 
 
ﬁIs it the same size?ﬂ Katherine move
d closer still, sounding excited now. 
 
ﬁThere™s one way to find out.ﬂ He took the 
ring and lowered it into the box, aligning the 
two tiny circles. As he pushed down, the rais
ed circle on the box 
slid into the ring™s 
opening, and there was a faint but decisive click. 
 
They all jumped. 
 
Langdon waited, but nothing happened. 
 
ﬁWhat was that?!ﬂ the priest said. 
 
ﬁNothing,ﬂ Katherine replied. ﬁThe
 ring locked into place . . . 
but nothing else happened.ﬂ  
 
ﬁNo great transformation?ﬂ 
Galloway looked puzzled.  
 
We™re not done,
 Langdon realized, gazing down at 
the ring™s embossed insigniaŠa 
double-headed phoenix and the number 33. 
All is revealed at the thirty-third degree.
 His 
mind filled with thoughts of Pythagoras, sacr
ed geometry, and angles; he wondered if 
perhaps 
degrees
 had a 
mathematical
 meaning. 
 
Slowly, heart beating faster now, he reached down and grasped the ring, which was 
affixed to the base of the cube. Then, slow
ly, he began turning the ring to the right. 
All is 
revealed at the thirty-third degree.
 
 
He turned the ring ten degrees . . . 
twenty degrees . . . thirty degreesŠ 
 
What happened next, Langdon never saw coming. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 85 
 
 
 
Transformation.
 
 
Dean Galloway 
heard
 it happen, and so he didn™t need to see it. 
 
Across the desk from him, Langdon and Kather
ine were dead silent, no doubt staring in 
mute astonishment at the stone
 cube, which had just transfor
med itself loudly before their 
very eyes. 
 
Galloway couldn™t help but smile. He had antici
pated the result, and 
although he still had 
no idea how this development would ultimately help them solve the riddle of the 
pyramid, he was enjoying the rare chance 
to teach a Harvard symbologist something 
about symbols. 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ the dean said, ﬁfew people realize 
that the Masons venerate the shape of the 
cubeŠor 
ashlar,
 as we call itŠbecause it is a th
ree-dimensional representation of 
another symbol . . . a much older, two-dime
nsional symbol.ﬂ Galloway didn™t need to ask 
if the professor recognized the ancient symbol
 now lying before them on the desk. It was 
one of the most famous symbols in the world. 
 
Robert Langdon™s thoughts churne
d as he stared at the tran
sformed box on the desk in 
front of him. 
I had no idea . . .
 
 
Moments ago, he had reached into the stone
 box, grasped the Masoni
c ring, and gently 
turned it. As he rotated 
the ring through thirty-three de
grees, the cube had suddenly 
changed before his eyes. The square panels 
that made up the sides of the box fell away 
from one another as their hidden hinges rel
eased. The box collapsed all at once, its side 
panels and lid falling outward, 
slapping loudly on the desk. 
 
 
 
 
 
The cube becomes a cross,
 Langdon thought. 
Symbolic alchemy.
 
 
Katherine looked bewildered by 
the sight of the collapsed cube. ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid 
relates to . . . Christianity?ﬂ 
 
For a moment, Langdon had wondered the same th
ing. After all, the 
Christian crucifix 
was a respected symbol within the Masons, an
d certainly there were plenty of Christian 
Masons. However, Masons were also Jews
, Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, and those who 
had no name for their God. The presence of 
an exclusively Christian symbol seemed 
restrictive. Then the 
true
 meaning of this symbol had dawned on him. 
 
ﬁIt™s not a crucifix,ﬂ Langdon 
said, standing up now. ﬁThe cross with the circumpunct in 
the middle is a binary symbolŠ
two
 symbols fused to create 
one
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat are you saying?ﬂ Katherine™s eyes
 followed him as he paced the room. 
 
ﬁThe cross,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁwas not a Christ
ian symbol until the fourth century. Long 
before that, it was used by the Egyptia
ns to represent the 
intersection of two 
dimensionsŠthe human and the celestial. 
As above, so below. It was a visual 
representation of the juncture 
where man and God become one.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe circumpunct,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁwe alr
eady know has many me
aningsŠone of its 
most esoteric being the 
rose,
 the alchemical symbol for perfection. But, when you place a 
rose on the center of a cross, you create 
another symbol entirelyŠthe Rose Cross.ﬂ 
 
Galloway reclined in his chair, smiling. ﬁMy, my. Now you™re cooking.ﬂ 
 
Katherine stood now, too. ﬁWhat am I missing?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Rose Cross,ﬂ Langdon explained, ﬁis a 
common symbol in Freemasonry. In fact, 
one of the degrees of the Scottish Rite is 
called ‚Knights of the Rose Cross™ and honors 
the early Rosicrucians, who contributed to Ma
sonic mystical philosophy. Peter may have 
mentioned the Rosicrucians to you. Dozens of 
great scientists were membersŠJohn Dee, 
Elias Ashmole, Robert FluddŠﬂ 
 
ﬁAbsolutely,ﬂ Katherine said. 
ﬁI™ve read all of the Rosi
crucian manifestos in my 
research.ﬂ 
 
Every scientist should,
 Langdon thought. The Order of the Rose CrossŠor more formally 
the Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae CrucisŠh
ad an enigmatic history that had greatly 
influenced science and closely paralleled th
e legend of the Ancient 
Mysteries . . . early 
sages possessing secret wisdom that was 
passed down through the ages and studied by 
only the brightest minds. Admittedly, history™s 
list of famous Rosicrucians was a who™s 
who of European Renaissance luminaries: 
Paracelsus, Bacon, Fludd, Descartes, Pascal, 
Spinoza, Newton, Leibniz. 
 
According to Rosicrucian doctrine, the order wa
s ﬁbuilt on esoteric tr
uths of the ancient 
past,ﬂ truths which had to 
be ﬁconcealed from the average manﬂ and which promised 
great insight into ﬁthe spir
itual realm.ﬂ The brotherhood™s 
symbol had blossomed over 
the years into a flowering rose on an ornate
 cross, but it had begun as a more modest 
dotted circle on an unadorned crossŠthe simp
lest manifestation of the rose on the 
simplest manifestation of the cross. 
 
ﬁPeter and I often discus
s Rosicrucian philosophy,ﬂ Galloway told Katherine. 
 
As the dean began outlining the interrelati
onship between Masonry 
and Rosicrucianism, 
Langdon felt his attention drawn back to the same nagging thought he™d had all night. 
Jeova Sanctus Unus. This phrase is
 linked to alchemy somehow.
 He still could not 
remember exactly what Peter had told him 
about the phrase, but for some reason, the 
mention of Rosicrucianism seemed
 to have rekindled the thought. 
Think, Robert!
 
 
ﬁThe Rosicrucian founder,ﬂ Galloway was sayi
ng, ﬁwas allegedly a German mystic who 
went by the name Christian RosenkreuzŠ
a pseudonym obviously, perhaps even for 
Francis Bacon, who some historians believe founded the group himself, although there is 
no proof ofŠﬂ 
 
ﬁA pseudonym!ﬂ Langdon declared suddenly, st
artling even himself. ﬁThat™s it! 
Jeova 
Sanctus Unus!
 It™s a pseudonym!ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat are you talking about
?ﬂ Katherine demanded. 
 
Langdon™s pulse had quickened now. ﬁAll night, I™
ve been trying to remember what Peter 
told me about 
Jeova Sanctus Unus
 and its relationship to al
chemy. Finally I remembered! 
It™s not about alchemy 
so much as about an 
alchemist
! A very famous alchemist!ﬂ 
 
Galloway chuckled. ﬁIt™s about 
time, Professor. I mentioned 
his name twice and also the 
word 
pseudonym
.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared at the old dean. ﬁYou 
knew
?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, I had my suspicions when you told me the engraving said 
Jeova Sanctus Unus
 and 
had been decrypted using Dürer™s alchemical
 magic square, but when you found the Rose 
Cross, I was certain. As you probably know, th
e personal papers of the scientist in 
question included a very heavily annotate
d copy of the Rosicrucian manifestos.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWho?ﬂ Katherine asked. 
 
ﬁOne of the world™s greatest scientists!ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁHe was an alchemist, a 
member of the Royal Society of London, a Rosicrucian, 
and
 he signed some of his most 
secretive science papers with a pseudonymŠ
‚Jeova Sanctus Unus™
!ﬂ 
 
ﬁOne True God?ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁModest guy.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBrilliant guy, actually,ﬂ Gallo
way corrected. ﬁHe signed his na
me that way because, like 
the ancient Adepts, he understood 
himself
 as divine. In addition, because the sixteen 
letters in 
Jeova Sanctus Unus
 could be rearranged to spell his name in Latin, making it a 
perfect pseudonym.ﬂ 
 
Katherine now looked puzzled. ﬁ
Jeova Sanctus Unus
 is an anagram of a famous 
alchemist™s name in Latin?ﬂ 
 
Langdon grabbed a piece of paper and pencil off 
the dean™s desk, writing as he talked. 
ﬁLatin interchanges the letters 
J
 for 
I
 and the letter 
V
 for 
U,
 which means 
Jeova Sanctus 
Unus
 can actually be perfectly rearranged to spell this man™s name.ﬂ 
 
Langdon wrote down sixteen letters: 
Isaacus Neutonuus.
 
 
He handed the slip of paper to Katherine 
and said, ﬁI think you™ve heard of him.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIsaac Newton?ﬂ Katherine demanded, looking at the paper. 
ﬁThat™s
 what the engraving 
on the pyramid was trying to tell us!ﬂ 
 
For a moment, Langdon was back in West
minster Abbey, standing at Newton™s 
pyramidical tomb, where he had experienced a similar epiphany. 
And tonight, the great 
scientist surfaces again.
 It was no coincidence, of course
 . . . the pyramids, mysteries, 
science, hidden knowledge . . . it was all intertwined. Newton™s name had always been a 
recurring guidepost for thos
e seeking secret knowledge. 
 
ﬁIsaac Newton,ﬂ Galloway said, ﬁmust have 
something to do with how to decipher the 
meaning of the pyramid. I can™t imagine what it would be, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁGenius!ﬂ Katherine exclaimed, her eyes 
going wide. ﬁThat™s how we transform the 
pyramid!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou understand?ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁYes!ﬂ she said. ﬁI can™t believe we didn™t see 
it! It has been staring us right in the face. 
A simple alchemical process. I can tran
sform this pyramid using basic science! 
Newtonian science!ﬂ 
 
Langdon strained to understand. 
 
ﬁDean Galloway,ﬂ Katherine said. 
ﬁIf you read the ring, it saysŠﬂ 
 
ﬁStop!ﬂ The old dean suddenly raised his 
finger in the air and motioned for silence. 
Gently, he cocked his head to the side, as 
if he were listening to something. After a 
moment, he stood up abruptly. ﬁMy friends, th
is pyramid obviously has secrets left to 
reveal. I don™t know what Ms. Solomon is ge
tting at, but if she knows your next step, 
then I have played my role. Pack up your 
things and say no more to me. Leave me in 
darkness for the moment. I would prefer to 
have no information to share should our 
visitors try to force me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁVisitors?ﬂ Katherin
e said, listening. ﬁI don™t hear anyone.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou 
will,
ﬂ Galloway said, heading for the door. ﬁHurry.ﬂ 
 
Across town, a cell tower was attempting to
 contact a phone that lay in pieces on 
Massachusetts Avenue. Finding no signal, it
 redirected the call to voice mail. 
 
ﬁRobert!ﬂ Warren Bellamy™s panicked voi
ce shouted. ﬁWhere are you?! Call me! 
Something terrible is happening!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 86 
 
 
 
In the
 cerulean glow of his basement lights,
 Mal™akh stood at the stone table and 
continued his preparations. As he worked, 
his empty stomach growled. He paid no heed. 
His days of servitude to the whim
s of his flesh were behind him. 
 
Transformation requires sacrifice.
 
 
Like many of history™s most spiritually e
volved men, Mal™akh had committed to his path 
by making the noblest of flesh sacrifices. Cast
ration had been less painful than he had 
imagined. And, he had learned, far more 
common. Every year, thousands of men 
underwent surgical geldingŠorchiectomy, as 
the process was knownŠtheir motivations 
ranging from transgender issues, to curbing se
xual addictions, to 
deep-seated spiritual 
beliefs. For Mal™akh, the reasons were of the 
highest nature. Like 
the mythological self-
castrated Attis, Mal™akh knew that achieving 
immortality required a clean break with the 
material world of male and female. 
 
The androgyne is one.
 
 
Nowadays, eunuchs were shunned, although the 
ancients understood the inherent power 
of this transmutational sacrifice. Even the 
early Christians had h
eard Jesus Himself extol 
its virtues in Matthew 19:12: 
ﬁThere are those who have made
 themselves eunuchs for 
the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He who 
is able to accept this, let him accept it.ﬂ
 
 
Peter Solomon had made a flesh sacrifice, a
lthough a single hand was 
a small price in the 
grand scheme. By night™s end, however, Solomon would be sacrificing much, much 
more. 
 
In order to create, I must destroy.
 
 
Such was the nature of polarity. 
 
Peter Solomon, of course, deserved the fate th
at awaited him tonight. 
It would be a fitting 
end. Long ago, he had played the pivotal role 
in Mal™akh™s mortal 
life path. For this 
reason, Peter had been chosen to play the pi
votal role in Mal™akh™
s great transformation. 
This man had earned all the horror and pain 
he was about to endure. Peter Solomon was 
not the man the world believed he was. 
 
He sacrificed his own son.
 
 
Peter Solomon had once presented his son, Z
achary, with an impossible choiceŠwealth 
or wisdom. 
Zachary chose poorly.
 The boy™s decision had begun a chain of events that 
eventually dragged the young ma
n into the depths of hell. 
Soganlik Prison.
 Zachary 
Solomon had died in that Turkish prison. The 
whole world knew the story . . . but what 
they didn™t know was that Peter 
Solomon could have saved his son. 
 
I was there,
 Mal™akh thought. 
I heard it all.
 
 
Mal™akh had never forgotten that night. Solo
mon™s brutal decision had meant the end of 
his son, Zach, but it had b
een the birth of Mal™akh. 
 
Some must die that others may live.
 
 
As the light over Mal™akh™s head began cha
nging color again, he realized the hour was 
late. He completed his preparations and headed
 back up the ramp. It was time to attend to 
matters of the mortal world. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 87 
 
 
 
All is
 revealed at the thirty-third degree,
 Katherine thought as she ran. 
I know how to 
transform the pyramid!
 The answer had been right in front of them all night. 
 
Katherine and Langdon were alone now, 
dashing through the cathedral™s annex, 
following signs for ﬁThe Garth.ﬂ Now, exactly 
as the dean had promised, they burst out 
of the cathedral into a ma
ssive, walled-in courtyard. 
 
The cathedral garth was a cl
oistered, pentagonal garden
 with a bronze postmodern 
fountain. Katherine was amazed how loudly the 
fountain™s flowing water seemed to be 
reverberating in the courtyar
d. Then she realized it was not
 the fountain she was hearing. 
 
ﬁHelicopter!ﬂ she shouted as a beam of li
ght pierced the night sky above them. ﬁGet 
under that portico!ﬂ 
 
The dazzling glare of a searchlight floode
d the garth just as Langdon and Katherine 
reached the other side, slipping 
beneath a Gothic arch into a tunnel that led to the outside 
lawn. They waited, huddled in the tunnel, 
as the helicopter passed overhead and began 
circling the cathedral in wide arcs. 
 
ﬁI guess Galloway was right about heari
ng visitors,ﬂ Katherine said, impressed. 
Bad eyes 
make for great ears.
 Her own ears now pounded rhythmi
cally with her racing pulse. 
 
ﬁThis way,ﬂ Langdon said, clutching his 
daybag and moving through the passage. 
 
Dean Galloway had given them a single key an
d a clear set of dir
ections. Unfortunately, 
when they reached the end of the short t
unnel, they found themselves separated from 
their destination by a wide-open expanse of 
lawn, currently flooded with light from the 
helicopter overhead. 
 
ﬁWe can™t get across,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
ﬁHold on . . . look.ﬂ Langdon pointed to a bl
ack shadow that was materializing on the 
lawn to their left. The shadow began as 
an amorphous blob, but it was growing quickly, 
moving in their direction, b
ecoming more defined, rushing at
 them faster and faster, 
stretching, and finally transfor
ming itself into a massive bl
ack rectangle crowned by two 
impossibly tall spires. 
 
ﬁThe cathedral facade is blocki
ng the searchlight,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁThey™re landing out in front!ﬂ 
 
Langdon grabbed Katherine™s hand. ﬁRun! Now!ﬂ 
 
Inside the cathedral, Dean Galloway felt a li
ghtness in his step that he had not felt in 
years. He moved through the Great Crossing, 
down the nave toward the narthex and the 
front doors. 
 
He could hear the helicopter hovering in front
 of the cathedral now, and he imagined its 
lights coming through the rose window in front 
of him, throwing spectacular colors all 
over the sanctuary. He recalled the days when 
he could see color. Ironically, the lightless 
void that had become his world had illuminated many things for him. 
I see more clearly 
now than ever.
 
 
Galloway had been called to God as a young 
man and over his lifetime had loved the 
church as much as any man could. Like many 
of his colleagues who 
had given their lives 
in earnest to God, Galloway was weary. He had 
spent his life straining to be heard above 
the din of ignorance. 
 
What did I expect?
 
 
From the Crusades, to the Inquisition, to 
American politicsŠthe name Jesus had been 
hijacked as an ally in all kinds of power
 struggles. Since the 
beginning of time, the 
ignorant had always screamed the loudest, herding the unsuspecting masses and forcing 
them to do their bidding. They defended their 
worldly desires by citi
ng Scripture they did 
not understand. They celebrated their intolerance 
as proof of their convictions. Now, after 
all these years, mankind had finally managed 
to utterly erode everything that had once 
been so beautiful about Jesus. 
 
Tonight, encountering the symbol
 of the Rose Cross had fu
eled him with great hope, 
reminding him of the prophecies written in 
the Rosicrucian manifestos, which Galloway 
had read countless times in the 
past and could still recall. 
 
Chapter One: 
Jehova will redeem humanity by 
revealing those secrets which he 
previously reserved only for the elect.
 
 
Chapter Four: 
The whole world shall become as one
 book and all the contradictions of 
science and theology sh
all be reconciled.
 
 
Chapter Seven: 
Before the end of the world, God sha
ll create a great 
flood of spiritual 
light to alleviate the 
suffering of humankind.
 
 
Chapter Eight: 
Before this revelation is possibl
e, the world must sleep away the 
intoxication of her poisoned chal
ice, which was filled with the 
false life of the theological 
vine.
 
 
Galloway knew the church had long ago lost 
her way, and he had dedicated his life to 
righting her course. Now, he realized
, the moment was fast approaching. 
 
It is always darkest before the dawn.
 
 
CIA field agent Turner Simkins was perched on 
the strut of the Sikor
sky helicopter as it 
touched down on the frosty grass. He leap
ed off, joined by his men, and immediately 
waved the chopper back up in
to the air to keep an
 eye on all the exits. 
 
Nobody leaves this building.
 
 
As the chopper rose back into the night sky, 
Simkins and his team ran up the stairs to the 
cathedral™s main entrance. Before he coul
d decide which of the six doors to pound on, 
one of them swung open. 
 
ﬁYes?ﬂ a calm voice said from the shadows. 
 
Simkins could barely make out the hunched fi
gure in priest™s robes.
 ﬁAre you Dean Colin 
Galloway?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI am,ﬂ the old man replied. 
 
ﬁI™m looking for Robert Langdon. Have you seen him?ﬂ 
 
The old man stepped forward now, staring past Simkins with eerie blank eyes. ﬁNow, 
wouldn™t 
that
 be a miracle.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 88 
 
 
 
Time is
 running out.
 
 
Security analyst Nola Kaye was already on 
edge, and the third mug of coffee she was 
now drinking had begun coursing thr
ough her like an electric current. 
 
No word yet from Sato.
 
 
Finally, her phone rang, and Nola leaped on 
it. ﬁOS,ﬂ she answered. ﬁNola here.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNola, it™s Rick Parrish in systems security.ﬂ 
 
Nola slumped. 
No Sato.
 ﬁHi, Rick. What can I do for you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI wanted to give you a head
s-upŠour department may have information relevant to 
what you™re working on tonight.ﬂ  
 
Nola set down her coffee. 
How the hell do
 you 
know what I™m working on tonight?
 ﬁI beg 
your pardon?ﬂ  
 
ﬁSorry, it™s the new CI program we™re beta-t
esting,ﬂ Parrish said. ﬁI
t keeps flagging your 
workstation number.ﬂ 
 
Nola now realized what he was talking a
bout. The Agency was currently running a new 
piece of ﬁcollaborative integrationﬂ software
 designed to provide real-time alerts to 
disparate CIA departments when they happened to be processing related data fields. In an 
era of time-sensitive terrorist threats, the key 
to thwarting disaster wa
s often as simple as 
a heads-up telling you that the guy down the ha
ll was analyzing the very data you needed. 
As far as Nola was concerned, this CI softwa
re had proven more of 
a distraction than any 
real helpŠ
constant interruption
 software, she called it. 
 
ﬁRight, I forgot,ﬂ Nola said. ﬁWhat have
 you got?ﬂ She was positive that nobody else in 
the building 
knew
 about this crisis, much less could be working on it. The only computer 
work Nola had done tonight was historical re
search for Sato on esoteric Masonic topics
.
 
Nonetheless, she was obliged to play the game. 
 
ﬁWell, it™s probably nothing,ﬂ Parrish said, ﬁb
ut we stopped a hacker tonight, and the CI 
program keeps suggesting I shar
e the information with you.ﬂ 
 
A hacker?
 Nola sipped her coffee. ﬁI™m listening.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAbout an hour ago,ﬂ Parrish said, ﬁwe sna
gged a guy named Zoubianis trying to access a 
file on one of our internal databases. This guy 
claims it was a job for 
hire and that he has 
no idea 
why
 he was being paid to access this partic
ular file or even that it was on a CIA 
server.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOkay.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe finished questioning him, and he™s clean. But here™s the weird thingŠthe 
same
 file 
he was targeting had been flagged earlier toni
ght by an internal sear
ch engine. It looks 
like someone piggybacked into our system, ran a specific keyword search, and generated 
a redaction. The thing is, the 
keywords
 they used are really st
range. And there™s one in 
particular that the CI flagged as a high-pr
iority matchŠone that™s 
unique to both of our 
data sets.ﬂ He paused. ﬁDo you know the word . . . 
symbolon
?ﬂ 
 
Nola jolted upright, spi
lling coffee on her desk.  
 
ﬁThe other keywords are just 
as unusual,ﬂ Parrish continued. 
ﬁPyramid, portalŠﬂ
 
 
ﬁGet down here,ﬂ Nola co
mmanded, mopping up her desk. 
ﬁAnd bring everything you™ve 
got!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThese words actually 
mean
 something to you?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNOW!ﬂ 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 89 
 
 
 
Cathedral College
 is an elegant, castlelike edifi
ce located adjacent to the National 
Cathedral. The College of Preachers, as it wa
s originally envisioned by the first Episcopal 
bishop of Washington, was founded to provide
 ongoing education fo
r clergy after their 
ordination. Today, the college offers a wi
de variety of programs on theology, global 
justice, healing, and spirituality. 
 
Langdon and Katherine had made the dash across
 the lawn and used Galloway™s key to 
slip inside just as the helic
opter rose back over the cathedr
al, its floodlights turning night 
back into day. Now, standing breathless in
side the foyer, they surveyed their 
surroundings. The windows provided suffici
ent illumination, and Langdon saw no reason 
to turn the lights on and take a chance of br
oadcasting their whereabouts to the helicopter 
overhead. As they moved down the central ha
llway, they passed a se
ries of conference 
halls, classrooms, and sitting areas. The in
terior reminded Langdon of the neo-Gothic 
buildings of Yale UniversityŠbreathtaking on 
the outside, and yet su
rprisingly utilitarian 
on the inside, their period elegance having been
 retrofitted to endure 
heavy foot traffic. 
 
ﬁDown here,ﬂ Katherine said, motioni
ng toward the far end of the hall. 
 
Katherine had yet to share with Langdon he
r new revelation regard
ing the pyramid, but 
apparently the reference to Isaacus Neutonuus 
had sparked it. All she had said as they 
crossed the lawn was that the pyramid coul
d be transformed using simple science. 
Everything she needed, she believed, could 
probably be found in 
this building. Langdon 
had no idea what she needed or how Katherine intended to transform a solid piece of 
granite or gold, but considering he had ju
st witnessed a cube metamorphose into a 
Rosicrucian cross, he was willing to have faith. 
 
They reached the end of the hall and Kather
ine frowned, apparently not seeing what she 
wanted. ﬁYou said this buildi
ng has dormitory facilities?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, for residential conferences.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo they 
must
 have a kitchen in here somewhere, right?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re hungry?ﬂ  
 
She frowned back at him. ﬁNo, I need a lab.ﬂ  
 
Of course you do.
 Langdon spotted a descending staircas
e that bore a promising symbol. 
America™s favorite pictogram.
 
 
 
 
The basement kitchen was industrial looki
ngŠlots of stainless steel and big bowlsŠ
clearly designed to cook for large groups. 
The kitchen had no windows. Katherine closed 
the door and flipped on the lights. Th
e exhaust fans came on automatically. 
 
She began rooting around in the cupboards fo
r whatever it was she needed. ﬁRobert,ﬂ she 
directed, ﬁput the pyramid out
 on the island, if you would.ﬂ 
 
Feeling like the novice sous 
chef taking orders from Dani
el Boulud, Langdon did as he 
was told, removing the pyramid from his ba
g and placing the gold cap
stone on top of it. 
When he finished, Katherine was busy filli
ng an enormous pot with hot tap water. 
 
ﬁWould you please lift this to the stove for me?ﬂ 
 
Langdon heaved the sloshing pot onto the stove
 as Katherine turned on the gas burner 
and cranked up the flame. 
 
ﬁAre we doing lobsters?ﬂ he asked hopefully. 
 
ﬁVery funny. No, we™re doing alchemy. 
And for the record, this is a 
pasta
 pot, not a 
lobster pot.ﬂ She pointed to th
e perforated strainer insert 
that she had removed from the 
pot and placed on the isla
nd beside the pyramid. 
 
Silly me.
 ﬁAnd boiling pasta is going to 
help us decipher the pyramid?ﬂ 
 
Katherine ignored the comment, 
her tone turning serious. ﬁA
s I™m sure you know, there is 
a historical and symbolic 
reason
 the Masons chose thirty-thr
ee as their highest degree.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course,ﬂ Langdon said. In the days of Py
thagoras, six centuries
 before Christ, the 
tradition of 
numerology
 hailed the number 33 as the highest
 of all the Master Numbers. It 
was the most sacred figure, symbolizing Di
vine Truth. The tradition lived on within the 
Masons . . . and elsewhere. It was no coincide
nce that Christians we
re taught that Jesus 
was crucified at age thirty-three, despite no real historical evidence to that effect. Nor was 
it coincidence that Joseph was said to have been  
thirty-three when he married the Virgin Mar
y, or that Jesus accomplished thirty-three 
miracles, or that God™s name 
was mentioned thirty-three time
s in Genesis, or that, in 
Islam, all the dwellers of heaven were permanently thirty-three years old. 
 
ﬁThirty-three,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁis a sacr
ed number in many mystical traditions.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCorrect.ﬂ Langdon still had no idea what 
this had to do with a pasta pot. 
 
ﬁSo it should come as no surprise to you that
 an early alchemist, Rosicrucian, and mystic 
like Isaac Newton 
also
 considered the number thirty-three special.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sure he did,ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁNewt
on was deep into numerology, prophecy, and 
astrology, but what doesŠﬂ 
 
ﬁAll is revealed at the thirty-third degree.ﬂ 
 
Langdon pulled Peter™s ring from his pocket and 
read the inscription. Then he glanced 
back at the pot of water. ﬁSorry, you lost me.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRobert, earlier tonigh
t, we all assumed ‚thirty-third 
degree™ referred to the Masonic 
degree, and yet when we rotated that ring th
irty-three degrees, the 
cube transformed and 
revealed a cross. At that mo
ment, we realized the word 
degree
 was being used in another 
sense.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes. Degrees of arc.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. But 
degree
 has a 
third
 meaning as well.ﬂ 
 
Langdon eyed the pot of water on the stove. ﬁTemperature.ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly!ﬂ she said. ﬁIt was right 
in front of us all night. ‚All is
 revealed at the thirty-third 
degree.™ If we bring this pyramid™s temperatur
e to thirty-three degr
ees . . . it may just 
reveal something.ﬂ 
 
Langdon knew Katherine Solomon was exceptionally
 bright, and yet she seemed to be 
missing a rather obvious point. 
ﬁIf I™m not mistaken, thirty
-three degrees is almost 
freezing. Shouldn™t we be putting the pyramid in the freezer?ﬂ 
 
Katherine smiled. ﬁNot if we want to follow the recipe written by the great alchemist and 
Rosicrucian mystic who signed his papers 
Jeova Sanctus Unus.
ﬂ 
 
Isaacus Neutonuus wrote recipes?
 
 
ﬁRobert, 
temperature
 is the fundamental alchemical 
catalyst, and it was not always 
measured in Fahrenheit and Celsius. There are far 
older
 temperature scales, one of them 
invented by IsaacŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Newton Scale!ﬂ Langdon sai
d, realizing she was right. 
 
ﬁYes! Isaac Newton invented an entire system
 of quantifying temperature based entirely 
on natural phenomena. The temperature of melting  
ice was Newton™s base point, and he calle
d it ‚the zeroth degree.™ ﬂ She paused. ﬁI 
suppose you can guess what degree he assigned the temperature of boiling waterŠthe 
king of all alchemical processes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThirty-three.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, thirty-three! The thirty-third degree. On the Newton Scale, the temperature of 
boiling water is thirty-three degrees. I re
member asking my brother once why Newton 
chose that number. I mean, it seemed so random. Boiling water is the most fundamental 
alchemical process, and he chose thirty-t
hree? Why not a hundred? Why not something 
more elegant? Peter explained that, to a my
stic like Isaac Newton, there was no number 
more elegant than thirty-three.ﬂ 
 
All is revealed at the thirty-third degree.
 Langdon glanced at the pot of water and then 
over at the pyramid. 
ﬁ
Katherine, the pyramid is made out of solid granite and solid gold. 
Do you really think boiling water is hot enough to transform it?ﬂ 
 
The smile on her face told Langdon that Katherine knew something he did not know. 
Confidently, she walked over to the island, 
lifted the gold-capped, 
granite pyramid, and 
set it in the strainer. Then she carefully lo
wered it into the bubb
ling water. ﬁLet™s find 
out, shall we?ﬂ 
 
High above the National Cathedral, the CIA 
pilot locked the helic
opter in auto-hover 
mode and surveyed the perimeter 
of the building and the grounds. 
No movement.
 His 
thermal imaging couldn™t penetrate the cathedr
al stone, and so he couldn™t tell what the 
team was doing inside, but if
 anyone tried to slip out, th
e thermal would pick it up. 
 
It was sixty seconds later that a thermal se
nsor pinged. Working on the same principle as 
home-security systems, the detector had id
entified a strong temperature differential. 
Usually this meant a human form moving throu
gh a cool space, but what appeared on the 
monitor was more of a thermal cloud, a patch of
 hot air drifting acro
ss the lawn. The pilot 
found the source, an active vent on the side of Cathedral College. 
 
Probably nothing,
 he thought. He saw these kind
s of gradients all the time. 
Someone 
cooking or doing laundry.
 As he was about to turn away, though, he realized something 
odd. There were no cars in the parking lot and 
no lights on anywhere in the building. 
 
He studied the UH-60™s imaging system for a 
long moment. Then he radioed down to his 
team leader. ﬁSimkins, it™s 
probably nothing, but . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁIncandescent temperature indicator!ﬂ Langdon had to admit, it was clever. 
 
ﬁIt™s simple science,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁDi
fferent substances in
candesce at different 
temperatures. We call them thermal markers. 
Science uses these markers all the time.ﬂ 
 
Langdon gazed down at the submerged pyramid and capstone. Wisps of steam were 
beginning to curl over the bubb
ling water, although he was 
not feeling hopeful. He 
glanced at his watch, and his heart rate acce
lerated: 11:45 P.M. ﬁYou believe something 
here will 
luminesce
 as it heats up?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot luminesce, Robert. 
Incandesce
. There™s a big difference.
 Incandescence is caused 
by 
heat,
 and it occurs at a specific temperature.
 For example, when steel manufacturers 
temper beams, they spray a grid on them with
 a transparent coating that incandesces at a 
specific target temperature so they know 
when the beams are done. Think of a mood ring. 
Just put it on your finger, and 
it changes color from body heat.ﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine, this pyramid was built in th
e 1800s! I can understand a craftsman making 
hidden release hinges in a st
one box, but applying some kind of transparent thermal 
coating?ﬂ 
 
ﬁPerfectly feasible,ﬂ she said, glancing hope
fully at the submerged pyramid. ﬁThe early 
alchemists used organic phosphors all the tim
e as thermal markers. The Chinese made 
colored fireworks, and even the EgyptiansŠﬂ
 Katherine stopped midsentence, staring 
intently into the roiling water. 
 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ Langdon followed her gaze into the tu
rbulent water but saw nothing at all.  
 
Katherine leaned in, staring more intently in
to the water. Suddenly she turned and ran 
across the kitchen toward the door. 
 
ﬁWhere are you going?ﬂ Langdon shouted. 
 
She slid to a stop at the kitchen light switc
h, flipped it off. The lights and exhaust fan 
went off, plunging the room into total dark
ness and silence. Langdon turned back to the 
pyramid and peered through the steam at th
e capstone beneath the 
water. By the time 
Katherine made it back to his side, hi
s mouth had fallen open in disbelief. 
 
Exactly as Katherine had predicted, a small section of the metal capstone was starting to 
glow beneath the water. Letters 
were starting to appear, and th
ey were getting brighter as 
the water heated up. 
 
ﬁText!ﬂ Katherine whispered. 
 
Langdon nodded, dumbstruck. The glowing words we
re materializing just beneath the 
engraved inscription on the capstone. It 
looked like only three words, and although 
Langdon could not yet read what the words 
said, he wondered if they would unveil 
everything they had been looking for tonight. 
The pyramid is a real map,
 Galloway had 
told them, 
and it points to a real location.
 
 
As the letters shone brighter, Katherine turned
 off the gas, and the water slowly stopped 
churning. The capstone now came into fo
cus beneath the water™s calm surface. 
 
Three shining words were clearly legible. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 90 
 
 
 
In the
 dim light of the Cathedral College ki
tchen, Langdon and Katherine stood over the 
pot of water and stared at th
e transformed capstone beneath 
the surface. On the side of 
the golden capstone, an inca
ndescent message was glowing. 
 
Langdon read the shining text, scarcely able 
to believe his eyes. He knew the pyramid 
was rumored to reveal a specific 
location
 . . . but he had never imagined that the location 
would be quite 
this
 specific. 
Eight Franklin Square
 
 
 
ﬁA street address,ﬂ he whispered, stunned. 
 
Katherine looked equally amazed. ﬁI don™t know what™s there, do you?ﬂ 
 
Langdon shook his head. He knew Franklin Square was one of the older sections of 
Washington, but he wasn™t familiar with the a
ddress. He looked at the tip of the capstone, 
and read downward, taking in the entire text. 
The
 
secret hides
 
within The Order
 
Eight Franklin Square
 
 
 
Is there some kind of Order on Franklin Square?
 
 
Is there a building that hides the 
opening to a deep spiral staircase?
 
 
Whether or not there was actually something 
buried
 at that address, Langdon had no idea. 
The important issue at this point was that 
he and Katherine had 
deciphered the pyramid 
and now possessed the information requi
red to negotiate Peter™s release. 
 
And not a moment too soon.
 
 
The glowing arms on Langdon™s Mickey Mouse wa
tch indicated that they had less than 
ten minutes to spare. 
 
ﬁMake the call,ﬂ Katherine said, motioning to 
a phone on the wall in 
the kitchen. ﬁNow!ﬂ 
 
The sudden arrival of this moment startl
ed Langdon, and he found himself hesitating. 
 
ﬁAre we sure about this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI most certainly am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m not telling him anything until we know Peter is safe.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course not. You remember the number, right?ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded and made his way over to the 
kitchen phone. He lifted the receiver and 
dialed the man™s cell-phone number. Katherin
e came over and placed her head next to his 
so she could listen in. As the line began 
to ring, Langdon prepared himself for the eerie 
whisper of the man who had 
tricked him earlier tonight. 
 
Finally, the call connected. 
 
There was no greeting, though. No voice. Only
 the sound of breathing at the other end. 
 
Langdon waited and then finally spoke. ﬁI have
 the information you want, but if you want 
it, you™ll have to give us Peter.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWho is this?ﬂ a woman™s voice replied. 
 
Langdon jumped. ﬁRobert Langdon,ﬂ he
 said reflexively. ﬁWho are 
you
?ﬂ For an instant 
he thought he must have dialed incorrectly. 
 
ﬁYour name is Langdon?ﬂ
 The woman sounded surprised. ﬁT
here™s someone here asking 
for you.ﬂ 
 
What?
 ﬁI™m sorry, 
who
 is this?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOfficer Paige Montgomery with Preferred S
ecurity.ﬂ Her voice seemed shaky. ﬁMaybe 
you can help us with this. About an hour 
ago, my partner responde
d to a 911 call in 
Kalorama Heights . . . a possible hostage situa
tion. I lost all contact 
with her, and so I 
called backup and came to check the reside
nce. We found my pa
rtner dead in the 
backyard. The home owner was gone, and so 
we broke in. A cell phone was ringing on 
the hall table, and IŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re inside?ﬂ Langdon demanded. 
 
ﬁYes, and the 911 tip . . . was a good one,ﬂ 
the woman stammered. ﬁSorry if I sound 
rattled, but my partner™s dead, and we found a 
man being held here against his will. He™s 
in bad shape, and we™re working on him no
w. He™s been asking for two peopleŠone 
named Langdon and one named Katherine.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s my brother!ﬂ Katherine blurted into 
the receiver, pressing her head closer to 
Langdon™s. ﬁI made the 911 
call! Is he okay?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁActually, ma™am, he™s . . .ﬂ The woman™s 
voice cracked. ﬁHe™s in bad shape. He™s 
missing his right hand . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁPlease,ﬂ Katherine urged. ﬁI want to talk to him!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThey™re working on him at the moment. He™s in and out of consciousness. If you™re 
anywhere in the area, you should get ove
r here. He obviously wants to see you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe™re about six minutes away!ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
ﬁThen I suggest you hurry.ﬂ There was a mu
ffled noise in the background, and the 
woman then returned to the line. ﬁSorry, it
 looks like I™m needed. I™ll speak to you when 
you arrive.ﬂ 
 
The line went dead. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 91 
 
 
 
Inside Cathedral
 College, Langdon and Katherine bounded up the basement stairs and 
hurried down a darkened hallway looking for 
a front exit. No longer did they hear the 
sounds of helicopter blades overhead, a
nd Langdon felt hopeful they could slip out 
unseen and find their way up to Kalorama Heights to see Peter. 
 
They found him. He™s alive.
 
 
Thirty seconds earlier, when they™d hung up 
with the female security guard, Katherine 
had hurriedly hoisted the steaming pyramid a
nd capstone out of the 
water. The pyramid 
was still dripping when she lo
wered it into Langdon™s leather 
bag. Now he could feel the 
heat radiating through the leather. 
 
Excitement over Peter™s discovery had tempor
arily trumped any further reflection on the 
capstone™s glowing messageŠ
Eight Franklin SquareŠ
 but there would be time for that 
once they got to Peter. 
 
As they rounded the corner at
 the top of the stairs, Kath
erine stopped short and pointed 
into a sitting room across the hall. Th
rough the bay window, Langdon could see a sleek 
black helicopter sitting silent on the lawn. A lone pilot stood beside it, facing away from 
them and talking on his radio. There was al
so a black Escalade with tinted windows 
parked nearby. 
 
Staying in the shadows, Langdon and Katherine 
moved into the sitting room, and peered 
out the window to see if they
 could see the rest of the fi
eld team. Thankfully, the huge 
lawn outside the National Cathedral was empty. 
 
ﬁThey must be inside th
e cathedral,ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁThey™re not,ﬂ a deep 
voice said behind them. 
 
Langdon and Katherine wheeled around to see 
who had spoken. In the doorway of the 
sitting room, two black-clad figures aimed la
ser-sighted rifles at
 them. Langdon could see 
a glowing red dot dancing on his chest. 
 
ﬁNice to see you again, Professor,ﬂ said a fam
iliar raspy voice. The agents parted, and the 
tiny form of Director Sato sliced effort
lessly through, crossing the sitting room and 
stopping directly in front of Langdon. ﬁYou™
ve made some exceedingly poor choices 
tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe police found Peter Solomon,ﬂ Langdon declar
ed forcefully. ﬁHe™s in bad shape, but 
he™ll live. It™s over.ﬂ 
 
If Sato was surprised Peter had been f
ound, she did not show it. Her eyes were 
unflinching as she walked to Langdon and st
opped only inches away. ﬁProfessor, I can 
assure you, this is nowhere 
near
 over. And if the police are now involved, it has only 
become more serious. As I told you earlier th
is evening, this is an
 extremely delicate 
situation. You never should have run away with that pyramid.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMa™am,ﬂ Katherine blurted, ﬁI n
eed to see my brother. You can 
have
 the pyramid, but 
you must letŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI 
must
?ﬂ Sato demanded, spinning to Katherine. 
ﬁMs. Solomon, I assume?ﬂ She stared at 
Katherine with fire in her ey
es and then turned back to 
Langdon. ﬁPut the leather bag on 
the table.ﬂ 
 
Langdon glanced down at the pair 
of laser sights on his chest.
 He set the leather bag on 
the coffee table. An agent approached cau
tiously, unzipped the bag, and pulled the two 
sides apart. A little puff of trapped steam billowed up out of the bag. He aimed his light 
inside, stared for a long, puzzled moment, and then nodded to Sato. 
 
Sato walked over and peered into the bag. Th
e wet pyramid and capstone glistened in the 
beam of the flashlight. Sato crouched dow
n, looking very closely at the golden capstone, 
which Langdon realized she had only seen in X-ray. 
 
ﬁThe inscription,ﬂ Sato demanded. ﬁDoes it 
mean anything to you? 
‚The secret hides 
within The Order™?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe™re not sure, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhy is the pyramid steaming hot?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe submerged it in boiling wate
r,ﬂ Katherine said without he
sitation. ﬁIt was part of the 
process of deciphering the code. We™ll tell 
you everything, but please let us go see my 
brother. He™s been throughŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYou 
boiled
 the pyramid?ﬂ Sato demanded. 
 
ﬁTurn off the flashlight,ﬂ Katherine said. 
ﬁLook at the capstone. You can probably still 
see.ﬂ 
 
The agent flicked off his light, and Sato 
knelt down before the capstone. Even from 
where Langdon was standing, he could see that 
the text on the capston
e was still glowing 
slightly. 
 
ﬁEight Franklin Square?ﬂ Sato said, sounding amazed. 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am. That text was written with 
an incandescent lacquer or something. The 
thirty-third degree was actuallyŠﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd the address?ﬂ Sato demanded. ﬁIs 
this
 what this guy wants?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁHe believes the pyramid is a map that will tell him the location of 
a great treasureŠthe key to unlocking the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
Sato looked again at the capstone, her expressi
on one of disbelief. ﬁTell me,ﬂ she said, 
fear creeping into he
r voice, ﬁhave you contacted th
is man yet? Have you already 
given
 
him this address?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe tried.ﬂ Langdon explained what had ha
ppened when they called the man™s cell 
phone. 
 
Sato listened, running her tongue over her 
yellow teeth as he 
spoke. Despite looking 
ready to erupt with anger over the situation, sh
e turned to one of her agents and spoke in 
a restrained whisper. ﬁSend 
him in. He™s in the SUV.ﬂ 
 
The agent nodded and spoke into his transceiver. 
 
ﬁSend who in?ﬂ Langdon said. 
 
ﬁThe only person who has any hope of fixing the goddamn mess you made!ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhat mess?ﬂ Langdon fired back. ﬁNow th
at Peter is safe, everything isŠﬂ 
 
ﬁFor Christ™s sake!ﬂ Sato exploded. ﬁThis is not 
about
 Peter! I tried to tell you that at the 
Capitol Building, Professor, but you chose to work 
against
 me rather than 
with
 me! Now 
you™ve made an ungodly mess! When you destroyed your cell phone, which, by the way, 
we 
were
 tracking, you cut off your communication w
ith this man. And this address you 
uncoveredŠwhatever the hell 
it isŠthis address was our 
one
 chance to catch this lunatic. 
I needed you to play his game, to 
provide
 him with this address so we would know where 
the hell to catch him!ﬂ 
 
Before Langdon could reply, Sato directed th
e remainder of her wr
ath at Katherine. 
 
ﬁAnd 
you,
 Ms. Solomon! You 
knew
 where this maniac lived? Why didn™t you tell me? 
You sent a rent-a-cop to this man™s house?
 Don™t you see you™ve ru
ined any chance we 
had of catching him there? I™m glad your brothe
r is safe, but let me tell you this, we are 
facing a crisis tonight whose ramifications far 
outreach your family. They will be felt all 
around the world. The man who took your brothe
r has enormous power, and we need to 
catch him immediately.ﬂ 
 
As she finished her tirade, the tall, elegan
t silhouette of Warren Bellamy emerged from 
the shadows and stepped into the sitting room
. He looked rumpled, bruised, and shaken . . 
. like he™d been through hell. 
 
ﬁWarren!ﬂ Langdon stood up. ﬁAre you okay?ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo,ﬂ he replied. ﬁNot really.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDid you hear? Peter is safe!ﬂ 
 
Bellamy nodded, looking dazed, as if nothing ma
ttered anymore. ﬁYes, I just heard your 
conversation. I™m glad.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWarren, what the hell is going on?ﬂ 
 
Sato intervened. ﬁYou boys can catch up in a 
minute. Right now, Mr. Bellamy is going to 
reach out to this lunatic and communicate with 
him. Just like he™s been doing all night.ﬂ 
 
Langdon felt lost. ﬁBellamy hasn™t been 
communicating
 with this guy tonight! This guy 
doesn™t even know Bellamy is involved!ﬂ 
 
Sato turned to Bellamy and raised her eyebrows. 
 
Bellamy sighed. ﬁRobert, I™m afraid I haven™t been entirely honest with you this 
evening.ﬂ Langdon could only stare. ﬁI thought 
I was doing the right thing . . .ﬂ Bellamy 
said, looking frightened. 
 
ﬁWell,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁ
now
 you will do the right thing . . . and 
we™d all better pray to God it 
works.ﬂ As if to substantiate Sato™s porten
tous tone, the mantel clock began chiming the 
hour. Sato took out a Ziploc bag of items a
nd tossed it to Bellamy. ﬁHere™s your stuff. 
Does your cell phone take photos?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 
 
ﬁGood. Hold up the capstone.ﬂ 
 
The message Mal™akh had just received 
was from his contactŠWarren BellamyŠthe 
Mason he had sent to the Capitol Buildi
ng earlier tonight to assist Robert Langdon. 
Bellamy, like Langdon, wanted Peter Solomon back alive and had assured Mal™akh he 
would help Langdon acquire and decipher th
e pyramid. All night, Mal™akh had been 
receiving e-mail updates, which had been automatically forwarded to his cell phone. 
 
This should be interesting,
 Mal™akh thought, opening the message. 
 
From: Warren Bellamy
  
 
got separated from langdon 
 
but finally have info you 
 
demanded. proof attached. 
 
call for missing piece. Šwb  
 
Šone attachment (jpeg)Š  
 
Call for missing piece?
 Mal™akh wondered, ope
ning the attachment. 
 
The attachment was a photo. 
 
When Mal™akh saw it, he gasped out loud, a
nd he could feel his heart start pounding with 
excitement. He was looking at a 
close-up of a tiny golden pyramid. 
The legendary 
capstone!
 The ornate engraving on the face carried a promising message: 
The secret 
hides within The Order.
 
 
Beneath the inscription, Mal™akh now saw 
something that stunned him. The capstone 
seemed to be glowing. In disbelief, he stared 
at the faintly radiant te
xt and realized that 
the legend was literally true: 
The Masonic Pyramid transforms itself to reveal its secret to 
the worthy.
 
 
How this magical transformation had occurre
d, Mal™akh had no idea, and he didn™t care. 
The glowing text was clearly pointing to 
a specific location in D.C., exactly as 
prophesied. 
Franklin Square.
 Unfortunately, the photo of 
the capstone also included 
Warren Bellamy™s index finger, which was 
strategically positioned on the capstone to 
block out a critical piece of information. 
The 
 
secret hides 
 
within The Order 
Franklin Square
 
 
 
Call for missing piece.
 Mal™akh now understood Bellamy™s meaning. 
 
The Architect of the Capitol had been coopera
tive all night, but now he had chosen to 
play a very dangerous game. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 92 
 
 
 
Beneath the
 watchful gaze of several armed 
CIA agents, Langdon, Katherine, and 
Bellamy waited with Sato in the Cathedral College sitting room. On the coffee table 
before them, Langdon™s leather bag was still 
open, the golden capstone peeking out the 
top. The words 
Eight Franklin Square
 had now faded away, leaving no evidence that they 
had ever existed. 
 
Katherine had pleaded with Sato to let her go 
see her brother, but Sato had simply shaken 
her head, eyes fixed on Bellamy™s cell phone. 
It sat on the coffee ta
ble and had yet to 
ring. 
 
Why didn™t Bellamy just tell me the truth?
 Langdon wondered. Apparently, the Architect 
had been in contact with 
Peter™s captor all night, r
eassuring him that Langdon was 
making progress deciphering the pyramid. It was a bluff, an attempt to buy time for Peter. 
In fact, Bellamy was doing all he
 could to interfere with any
one who threatened to unveil 
the pyramid™s secret. Now, however, it seemed
 that Bellamy had switched sides. He and 
Sato were now prepared to risk the pyra
mid™s secret in hopes of catching this man. 
 
ﬁTake your hands off me!ﬂ shouted an
 elderly voice in the hall. ﬁI™m 
blind,
 not inept! I 
know my way through the colleg
e!ﬂ Dean Galloway was still 
protesting loudly as a CIA 
agent manhandled him into the sitting room and forced him into one of the chairs. 
 
ﬁWho™s here?ﬂ Galloway demanded, his blank ey
es staring dead ahead. ﬁIt sounds like a 
lot of you. How many do you need to de
tain an old man? Really now!ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere are seven of us,ﬂ Sato declared. 
ﬁIncluding Robert Langdon, Katherine Solomon, 
and your Masonic brother Warren Bellamy.ﬂ 
 
Galloway slumped, all his bluster gone. 
 
ﬁWe™re okay,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁAnd we just heard th
at Peter is safe. He™s in bad shape, but 
the police are with him.ﬂ  
 
ﬁThank heavens,ﬂ Galloway said. ﬁAnd theŠﬂ 
 
A loud rattling caused everyone in the room
 to jump. It was Bellamy™s cell phone 
vibrating against the coffee 
table. Everyone fell silent. 
 
ﬁOkay, Mr. Bellamy,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁDon™
t blow it. You know the stakes.ﬂ 
 
Bellamy took a deep breath and exhaled. Then he reached down and pressed the 
speakerphone button to 
connect the call. 
 
ﬁBellamy here,ﬂ he said, speaking loud
ly toward the phone on the coffee table. 
 
The voice that crackled back through the speak
er was familiar, an airy whisper. It 
sounded like he was calling from a hands-free 
speakerphone inside 
a car. ﬁIt™s past 
midnight, Mr. Bellamy. I was about to put Peter out of his misery.ﬂ 
 
There was an uneasy silence in the room. ﬁLet me talk to him.ﬂ 
 
ﬁImpossible,ﬂ the man replied. ﬁWe™re driving. He™s tied up in the trunk.ﬂ 
 
Langdon and Katherine exchanged looks and then
 began shaking their heads at everyone. 
He™s bluffing! He no longer has Peter!
 
 
Sato motioned for Bellamy to keep pressing. 
 
ﬁI want 
proof
 that Peter™s alive,ﬂ Bellamy sai
d. ﬁI™m not giving you the rest ofŠﬂ 
 
ﬁYour Worshipful Master need
s a doctor. Don™t waste time 
with negotiations. Tell me the 
street number on Franklin Square, 
and I™ll bring Pete
r to you there.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI told you, I wantŠﬂ 
 
ﬁNow!ﬂ the man exploded. ﬁOr I will pull ov
er and Peter Solomon dies this instant!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou listen to me,ﬂ Bellamy said forcefully. 
ﬁIf you want the rest 
of the address, you™ll 
play by 
my
 rules. Meet me at Franklin Square. 
Once you deliver Peter alive, I™ll tell you 
the number of the building.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHow do I know you won™t 
bring the authorities?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBecause I can™t risk double-crossing you. Peter™s life is 
not
 the only card you hold. I 
know what™s really at stake tonight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou do realize,ﬂ the man on the pho
ne said, ﬁthat if I sense so 
much as a hint of anyone 
other than 
you
 at Franklin Square, I will keep dr
iving, and you will never find even a 
trace of Peter Solomon. And of
 course . . . that will be the least of your worries.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll come alone,ﬂ Bellamy replied somber
ly. ﬁWhen you turn over Peter, I™ll give you 
everything you need.ﬂ 
 
ﬁCenter of the square,ﬂ the man said. ﬁIt will ta
ke me at least twenty 
minutes to get there. 
I suggest you wait for me as long as it takes.ﬂ 
 
The line went dead. 
 
Instantly, the room sprang to 
life. Sato began shouting orders. Several field agents 
grabbed their radios and headed for the door. ﬁMove! Move!ﬂ 
 
In the chaos, Langdon looked to 
Bellamy for some kind of e
xplanation as to what was 
actually going on tonight, but the older man 
was already being hu
rried out the door. 
 
ﬁI need to see my brother!ﬂ Katherine shouted. ﬁYou 
have
 to let us go!ﬂ 
 
Sato walked over to Katherine. ﬁI don™t 
have
 to do anything, Ms. Solomon. Is that clear?ﬂ 
 
Katherine stood her ground and looked desperately into Sato™s small eyes. 
 
ﬁMs. Solomon, my top priority is apprehe
nding the man at Franklin Square, and you will 
sit here with one of my men until I accomplish that task. Then, and only then, will we 
deal with your brother.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re missing the point,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁI know 
exactly
 where this man lives! It™s 
literally five minutes up the road in Kalorama
 Heights, and there will be evidence there 
that will help you! Besides, you said you want 
to keep this quiet. Who knows what Peter 
will start telling the authorit
ies once he™s stabilized.ﬂ 
 
Sato pursed her lips, apparently
 registering Katherine™s point
. Outside, the chopper blades 
began winding up. Sato frowned and then turned to one of her men. ﬁHartmann, you take 
the Escalade. Transport Ms. Solomon and 
Mr. Langdon to Kalorama Heights. Peter 
Solomon is not to speak to 
anyone
. Is that understood?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, ma™am,ﬂ the agent said. 
 
ﬁCall me when you get there. Tell me what
 you find. And don™t let these two out of your 
sight.ﬂ 
 
Agent Hartmann gave a quick nod, pulled out th
e Escalade keys, and headed for the door. 
 
Katherine was right behind him. 
 
Sato turned to Langdon. ﬁI™ll see you shortl
y, Professor. I know you think I™m the enemy, 
but I can assure you that™s not the case. Ge
t to Peter at once. This isn™t over yet.ﬂ 
 
Off to one side of Langdon, Dean Galloway was 
sitting quietly at the coffee table. His 
hands had found the stone pyramid, which was 
still sitting in Langdon™s open leather bag 
on the table in front of him. The old man 
was running his hands over the stone™s warm 
surface. 
 
Langdon said, ﬁFather, are you coming to see Peter?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™d just slow you down.ﬂ Galloway removed 
his hands from the bag and zipped it up 
around the pyramid. ﬁI™ll stay right here and pr
ay for Peter™s recove
ry. We can all speak 
later. But when you show Peter the pyrami
d, would you please tell him something for 
me?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ Langdon hoisted 
the bag onto his shoulder. 
 
ﬁTell him this.ﬂ Galloway cleared his throat
. ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid has always kept her 
secret . . . 
sincerely
.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t understand.ﬂ 
 
The old man winked. ﬁJust tell Pe
ter that. He will understand.ﬂ 
 
With that, Dean Galloway bowed his head and began praying. 
 
Perplexed, Langdon left him there and hurried ou
tside. Katherine was already in the front 
seat of the SUV giving the agent directions
. Langdon climbed in back and had barely 
closed the door before the giant vehicle wa
s rocketing across the lawn, racing northward 
to Kalorama Heights. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 93 
 
 
 
Franklin Square
 is located in the northwest qu
adrant of downtown Washington, 
bordered by K and Thirteenth streets. It is 
home to many historic buildings, most notably 
the Franklin School, from which Alexander Gr
aham Bell sent the world™s first wireless 
message in 1880. 
 
High above the square, a fast-moving UH-60 he
licopter approached from the west, 
having completed its journey from the Na
tional Cathedral in a matter of minutes. 
Plenty 
of time,
 Sato thought, peering down at
 the square below. She kne
w it was critical that her 
men got into position undetected 
before their target arrived. 
He said he wouldn™t be here 
for at least twenty minutes.
 
 
On Sato™s command, the pilot performed a ﬁtouch-hoverﬂ on the roof of the tallest 
building aroundŠthe renowned One Franklin Sq
uareŠa towering and prestigious office 
building with two gold spires on top. The ma
neuver was illegal, of course, but the 
chopper was there only a few seconds, and its 
skids barely touched the gravel rooftop. 
Once everyone had jumped out, the pilot im
mediately lifted off, banking to the east, 
where he would climb to ﬁs
ilent altitudeﬂ and provide 
invisible support from above. 
 
Sato waited as her field team collected thei
r things and prepared Bellamy for his task. 
The Architect was still looking dazed from havi
ng seen the file on Sato™s secure laptop. 
As I said . . . an issue of national security.
 Bellamy had quickly understood Sato™s 
meaning and was now fully cooperative. 
 
ﬁAll set, ma™am,ﬂ Agent Simkins said. 
 
On Sato™s command, the agents ushered Be
llamy across the rooftop and disappeared 
down a stairwell, heading for ground level to take up their positions. 
 
Sato walked to the edge of the building 
and gazed down. The rectangular wooded park 
below filled the entire block. 
Plenty of cover.
 Sato™s team fully understood the 
importance of making an undetected intercept. 
If their target sensed
 a presence here and 
decided just to slip away . . . the direct
or didn™t even want to think about it. 
 
The wind up here was gusty and cold. Sato wr
apped her arms around herself, and planted 
her feet firmly to avoid getting blown ove
r the edge. From this high vantage point, 
Franklin Square looked sma
ller than she recalled, with 
fewer buildings. She wondered 
which building was Eight Franklin Square. Th
is was information she had requested from 
her analyst Nola, from whom she expected word at any moment. 
 
Bellamy and the agents now appeared, looking li
ke ants fanning out into the darkness of 
the wooded area. Simkins positioned Bellamy in 
a clearing near the center of the deserted 
park. Then Simkins and his team melted into 
the natural cover, di
sappearing from view. 
Within seconds, Bellamy was alone, pacing and sh
ivering in the light of a streetlamp near 
the center of the park. 
 
Sato felt no pity. 
 
She lit a cigarette and took a long drag, savoring the warmth as it permeated her lungs. 
Satisfied that everything below 
was in order, she stepped back from the edge to await her 
two phone callsŠone from her analyst Nola and one from Agent Hartmann, whom she 
had sent to Kalorama Heights. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 94 
 
 
 
Slow down!
 Langdon gripped the backseat of the 
Escalade as it flew around a corner, 
threatening to tip up on two tires. CIA agent 
Hartmann was either eager to show off his 
driving skills to Katherine, or he had orde
rs to get to Peter Solomon before Solomon 
recuperated enough to say anything he s
houldn™t say to the local authorities. 
 
The high-speed game of beat-the-red-light
 on Embassy Row had been worrisome enough, 
but now they were racing through the wi
nding residential neighborhood of Kalorama 
Heights. Katherine shouted directions as 
they went, having been to this man™s house 
earlier that afternoon. 
 
With every turn, the leather bag at Langdon™
s feet rocked back and forth, and Langdon 
could hear the clank of the capstone, which 
had clearly been jarred from the top of the 
pyramid and was now bouncing around in the bo
ttom of his bag. Fearing it might get 
damaged, he fished around inside until he found it. It was still warm, but the glowing text 
had now faded and disappeared, return
ing to its original engraving: 
 
The secret hides within The Order.
 
 
As Langdon was about to place the capstone in
 a side pocket, he 
noticed its elegant 
surface was covered with tiny white gobs of so
mething. Puzzled, he tried to wipe them 
off, but they were stuck on and ha
rd to the touch . . . like plastic. 
What in the world?
 He 
could now see that the surface of the stone pyr
amid itself was also covered with the little 
white dots. Langdon used his fingernail and picked
 one off, rolling it between his fingers. 
 
ﬁWax?ﬂ he blurted. 
 
Katherine glanced over her shoulder. ﬁWhat?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere are bits of wax al
l over the pyramid and capstone. I don™t understand it. Where 
could that possibly have 
come
 from?ﬂ  
 
ﬁSomething in your bag, maybe?ﬂ  
 
ﬁI don™t think so.ﬂ  
 
As they rounded a corner, Katherine pointed 
through the windshield and turned to Agent 
Hartmann. ﬁThat™s it! We™re here.ﬂ 
 
Langdon glanced up and saw the spinning lights 
of a security vehicle parked in a 
driveway up ahead. The driveway gate wa
s pulled aside and the agent gunned the SUV 
inside the compound. 
 
The house was a spectacular mansion. Every light
 inside was ablaze, and the front door 
was wide open. A half-dozen vehicles were 
parked haphazardly in the driveway and on 
the lawn, apparently having arrived in a hu
rry. Some of the cars were still running and 
had their headlights shining, most on the house,
 but one askew, practically blinding them 
as they drove in. 
 
Agent Hartmann skidded to a stop on the lawn beside a white sedan with a brightly 
colored decal: 
PREFERRED SECURITY
. The spinning lights and the high beams in 
their face made it hard to see. 
 
Katherine immediately jumped out and raced
 for the house. Langdon heaved his bag onto 
his shoulder without taking the time to zip it
 up. He followed Katherine at a jog across 
the lawn toward the open front door. Th
e sounds of voices echoed within. Behind 
Langdon, the SUV chirped as Agent Hartmann lock
ed the vehicle and hurried after them. 
 
Katherine bounded up the porch stairs, through 
the main door, and disappeared into the 
entryway. Langdon crossed the threshold behind 
her and could see Katherine was already 
moving across the foyer and down the main 
hallway toward the sound of voices. Beyond 
her, visible at the end of the hall, was a di
ning-room table where a woman in a security 
uniform was sitting with her back to them. 
 
ﬁOfficer!ﬂ Katherine shouted as she ran. ﬁWhere is Peter Solomon?ﬂ 
 
Langdon rushed after her, but as he did so, an unexpected movement caught his eye. To 
his left, through the living-r
oom window, he could see th
e driveway gate was now 
swinging shut. 
Odd
. Something else caught his eye . . . something that had been hidden 
from him by the glare of the spinning light
s and the blinding high beams when they drove 
in. The half-dozen cars parked haphazardly in
 the driveway looked nothing like the police 
cars and emergency vehicles La
ngdon had imagined they were. 
 
A Mercedes? . . . a Hummer? . . . a Tesla Roadster?
 
 
In that instant, Langdon also realized the voi
ces he heard in the house were nothing but a 
television blaring in the di
rection of the dining room. 
 
Wheeling in slow motion, Langdon shouted 
down the hallway. ﬁKatherine, wait!ﬂ 
 
But as he turned, he could see that Katherine Solomon was no longer running. 
 
She was airborne. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 95 
 
 
 
Katherine Solomon
 knew she was falling . . . but she couldn™t figure out why. 
 
She had been running down the hall toward the 
security guard in the dining room when 
suddenly her feet had become entangled in 
an invisible obstacle, and her entire body had 
lurched forward, sailing through the air. 
 
Now she was returning to earth . . 
. in this case, a hardwood floor. 
 
Katherine crashed down on her stomach, the wind
 driven violently from her lungs. Above 
her, a heavy coat tree teeter
ed precariously and then toppled over, barely missing her on 
the floor. She raised her head, still gasping fo
r breath, puzzled to see that the female 
security guard in the chair ha
d not moved a muscle. Stranger s
till, the toppled coat tree 
appeared to have a thin wire attached to 
the bottom, which had b
een stretched across the 
hallway. 
 
Why in the world would someone . . . ?
 
 
ﬁKatherine!ﬂ Langdon was shouting to her, an
d as Katherine rolled
 onto her side and 
looked back at him, she fe
lt her blood turn to ice. 
Robert! Behind you!
 She tried to 
scream, but she was still gasping for breath. Al
l she could do was watch in terrifying slow 
motion as Langdon rushed down the hall to help
 her, completely unaware that behind 
him, Agent Hartmann was staggering across th
e threshold and clutch
ing his throat. Blood 
sprayed through Hartmann™s hands as he groped at the handle of a long screwdriver that 
protruded from his neck. 
 
As the agent pitched forward, his attacker came into full view. 
 
My God . . . no!
 
 
Naked except for a strange undergarment th
at looked like a loincloth, the massive man 
had apparently been hiding in the foyer. His muscular body was covered from head to toe 
with strange tattoos. The front
 door was swinging closed, 
and he was rushing down the 
hall after Langdon. 
 
Agent Hartmann hit the floor just as th
e front door slammed shut. Langdon looked 
startled and whirled around, but
 the tattooed man was already on him, thrusting some 
kind of device into his back. There was a flash 
of light and a sharp el
ectrical sizzle, and 
Katherine saw Langdon go rigid. Eyes frozen
 wide, Langdon lurched forward, collapsing 
down in a paralyzed heap. He fell hard on top of his leather bag, the pyramid tumbling 
out onto the floor. 
 
Without so much as a glance down at his 
victim, the tattooed ma
n stepped over Langdon 
and headed directly for Katherine. She was 
already crawling backwa
rd into the dining 
room, where she collided with a chair. The 
female security guard, who had been propped 
in that chair, now wobbled and dropped to th
e floor in a heap beside her. The woman™s 
lifeless expression was one of terror. Her mouth was stuffed with a rag. 
 
The enormous man had reached her before Kath
erine had time to react. He seized her by 
the shoulders with impossible strength. His face, no longer covered by makeup, was an 
utterly terrifying sight. His muscles flexed, 
and she felt herself being flipped over onto 
her stomach like a rag doll. A heavy knee gr
ound into her back, and for a moment, she 
thought she would break in two. He grabbe
d her arms and pulled them backward. 
 
With her head now turned to one side and 
her cheek pressed into the carpet, Katherine 
could see Langdon, his body still jerking, f
acing away from her. Beyond that, Agent 
Hartmann lay motionless in the foyer. 
 
Cold metal pinched Katherine™s wrists, and 
she realized she was 
being bound with wire. 
In terror, she tried to pull away, but doi
ng so sent searing pain into her hands. 
 
ﬁThis wire 
will
 cut you if you move,ﬂ the man said, fi
nishing with her wrists and moving 
down to her ankles with 
frightening efficiency. 
 
Katherine kicked at him, and he threw a power
ful fist into the back
 of her right thigh, 
crippling her leg. Within s
econds, her ankles were bound. 
 
ﬁRobert!ﬂ she now managed to call out. 
 
Langdon was groaning on the floor in the hall
way. He lay crumpled on his leather bag 
with the stone pyramid lying on its side near
 his head. Katherine 
realized the pyramid 
was her last hope. 
 
ﬁWe deciphered the pyramid!ﬂ she told 
her attacker. ﬁI™ll tell you everything!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, you will.ﬂ With that, he pulled the cloth from the dead woman™
s mouth and firmly 
stuffed it into Katherine™s. 
 
It tasted like death. 
 
Robert Langdon™s body was not his own. He la
y, numb and immobile, his cheek pressed 
against the hardwood floor. He had heard e
nough about stun guns to know they crippled 
their victims by temporarily overloading th
e nervous system. Their actionŠsomething 
called electromuscular disruptionŠmight as
 well have been a bolt of lightning. The 
excruciating jolt of pain seemed to penetr
ate every molecule of his body. Now, despite 
his mind™s focused intention, his muscles re
fused to obey the command he was sending 
them. 
 
Get up!
 
 
Facedown, paralyzed on the floor, Langdon was gul
ping shallow breaths, scarcely able to 
inhale. He had yet to lay eyes on the man w
ho had attacked him, but he could see Agent 
Hartmann lying in an expanding pool of 
blood. Langdon had heard Katherine struggling 
and arguing, but moments ago her voice had be
come muffled, as if the man had stuffed 
something in her mouth. 
 
Get up, Robert! You™ve got to help her!
 
 
Langdon™s legs were tingling now, a fiery and pain
ful recovery of feeling, but still they 
refused to cooperate. 
Move!
 His arms twitched as sensati
on started to come back, along 
with feeling in his face and 
neck. With great effort, he managed to rotate his head, 
dragging his cheek roughly across the hardwood fl
oor as he turned his head to look down 
into the dining room. 
 
Langdon™s sight line was impededŠby the ston
e pyramid, which had toppled out of his 
bag and was lying sideways on the floor, its base inches from his face. 
 
For an instant, Langdon didn™t understand what 
he was looking at. The square of stone 
before him was obviously the base of the pyr
amid, and yet it looked somehow different. 
Very different. It was still square, and still 
stone . . . but it was no 
longer flat and smooth. 
The base of the pyramid was covered with engraved markings. 
How is this possible?
 He 
stared for several seconds, wondering if he was hallucinating. 
I looked at the base of this 
pyramid a dozen times . . . and there were no markings!
 
 
Langdon now realized why. 
 
His breathing reflex kick-start
ed, and he drew a sudden gasp 
of air, realizing that the 
Masonic Pyramid had secrets yet to share. 
I have witnessed anot
her transformation.
 
 
In a flash, Langdon understood the mean
ing of Galloway™s last request. 
Tell Peter this: 
The Masonic Pyramid has always kept her secret . . . sincerely.
 The words had seemed 
strange at the time, but now Langdon underst
ood that Dean Galloway was sending Peter 
a code. Ironically, this same code had been 
a plot twist in a me
diocre thriller Langdon 
had read years ago. 
 
Sin-cere.
 
 
Since the days of Michelangelo, scul
ptors had been hiding the flaws in  
their work by smearing hot wax into the cracks 
and then dabbing the wax with stone dust. 
The method was considered cheating, and 
therefore, any sculpture ﬁwithout waxﬂŠ
literally 
sine cera
Šwas considered a ﬁsincereﬂ piece of 
art. The phrase stuck. To this day 
we still sign our letters
 ﬁsincerelyﬂ as a promise that we
 have written ﬁwithout waxﬂ and 
that our words are true. 
 
The engravings on the base of this pyra
mid had been concealed by the same method. 
When Katherine followed the capstone™s directions and 
boiled
 the pyramid, the wax 
melted away, revealing the writing on the 
base. Galloway had run his hands over the 
pyramid in the sitting room, 
apparently feeling the markings exposed on the bottom. 
 
Now, if only for an instant, Langdon had forgo
tten all the danger he and Katherine faced. 
He stared at the incredible array of symbol
s on the base of the pyramid. He had no idea 
what they meant . . . or what they would ul
timately reveal, but one thing was for certain. 
The Masonic Pyramid has secrets left to te
ll. Eight Franklin Square is not the final 
answer.
 
 
Whether it was this adrenaline-filled revela
tion or simply the extra few seconds lying 
there, Langdon did not know, but he sudde
nly felt control returning to his body. 
 
Painfully, he swept an arm to one side, pushing 
the leather bag out of the way to clear his 
sight line into the dining room. 
 
To his horror, he saw that Katherine had b
een tied up, and a large rag had been stuffed 
deep into her mouth. Langdon flexed his muscles, trying to climb to his knees, but a 
moment later, he froze in utter disbelief. Th
e dining-room doorway had just filled with a 
chilling sightŠa human form unlike anything Langdon had ever seen. 
 
What in the name of God . . . ?!
 
 
Langdon rolled, kicking with his legs, trying 
to back away, but the huge tattooed man 
grabbed him, flipping him onto his back and st
raddling his chest. He placed his knees on 
Langdon™s biceps, pinning Langdon pain fully 
to the floor. The man™s chest bore a 
rippling double-headed phoenix. His neck, face,
 and shaved head were covered with a 
dazzling array of unusually intricate sym
bolsŠsigils, Langdon knewŠwhich were used 
in the rituals of dark ceremonial magic. 
 
Before Langdon could process anything mo
re, the huge man clasped Langdon™s ears 
between his palms, lifted his head up off the 
floor, and, with incredible force, smashed it 
back down onto the hardwood. 
 
Everything went black. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 96 
 
 
 
Mal™akh stood
 in his hallway and surveyed the 
carnage around him. His home looked 
like a battlefield. 
 
Robert Langdon lay unconscious at his feet. 
 
Katherine Solomon was bound and ga
gged on the dining-room floor. 
 
The corpse of a female security guard lay 
crumpled nearby, having toppled off the chair 
where she was propped. This female guard, eager
 to save her own life, had done exactly 
as Mal™akh commanded. With a knife to her 
throat, she had answ
ered Mal™akh™s cell 
phone and told the lie that had coaxed La
ngdon and Katherine to come racing out here. 
She had no partner, and Peter Solomon was certainly not okay.
 As soon as the woman 
had given her performance, Mal™
akh had quietly strangled her. 
 
To complete the illusion that Mal™akh was 
not home, he had phoned Bellamy using the 
hands-free speaker in
 one of his cars. 
I™m on the road,
 he had told Bellamy and whoever 
else had been listening. 
Peter is in my trunk.
 In fact, Mal™akh was driving only between 
his garage and his front yard, 
where he had left several of 
his myriad cars parked askew 
with the headlights on and the engines running. 
 
The deception had worked perfectly. 
 
Almost. 
 
The only wrinkle was the bloody black-clad 
heap in the foyer with a screwdriver 
protruding from his neck. Mal™
akh searched the corpse and 
had to chuckle when he found 
a high-tech transceiver a
nd cell phone with a CIA logo. 
It seems even
 they 
are aware of 
my power.
 He removed the batteries and crushed both devices with a heavy bronze 
doorstop. 
 
Mal™akh knew he had to move quickly now
, especially if the CIA was involved. He 
strode back over to Langdon. The professor 
was out cold and would be for a while. 
Mal™akh™s eyes moved with trepidation now to
 the stone pyramid on the floor beside the 
professor™s open bag. His breath
 caught, and his heart pounded. 
 
I have waited for years . . .
 
 
His hands trembled slightly as he reached down and picked up the Masonic Pyramid. As 
he ran his fingers slowly acro
ss the engravings, he felt awed by their promise. Before he 
became too entranced, he put the pyramid back in Langdon™s bag with the capstone and 
zipped it up. 
 
I will assemble the pyramid soon . . . in a much safer location.
 
 
He threw Langdon™s bag over his shoulder and 
then tried to hoist Langdon himself, but 
the professor™s toned physique weighed much
 more than anticipated. Mal™akh settled on 
grabbing him beneath the armpits 
and dragging him across the floor. 
He™s not going to 
like where he ends up,
 Mal™akh thought. 
 
As he dragged Langdon off, the television in
 the kitchen blared. The sound of voices 
from the TV had been part of the decepti
on, and Mal™akh had yet to turn it off. The 
station was now broadcasting 
a televangelist leading his congregation in the Lord™s 
Prayer. Mal™akh wondered if any of his 
hypnotized viewers had any idea where this 
prayer really came from. 
 
ﬁ . . . On earth as it is in 
heaven . . .ﬂ the group intoned. 
 
Yes,
 Mal™akh thought. 
As above, so below.
 
 
ﬁ . . . And lead us not into temptation . . .ﬂ 
 
Help us master the weakness of our flesh.
 
 
ﬁ . . . Deliver us from evil . . .ﬂ they all beseeched. 
 
Mal™akh smiled. 
That could be difficult. The darkness is growing.
 Even so, he had to give 
them credit for trying. Humans who spoke to in
visible forces and re
quested help were a 
dying breed in this modern world. 
 
Mal™akh was dragging Langdon across the living 
room when the congregation declared, 
ﬁAmen!ﬂ 
 
Amon,
 Mal™akh corrected. 
Egypt is the cradle of your religion.
 The god Amon was the 
prototype for Zeus . . . for Jupiter . . . and for every modern face of God. To this day, 
every religion on earth shouted out a variation of his name. 
Amen! Amin! Aum!
 
 
The televangelist began quoting verses from 
the Bible describing hierarchies of angels, 
demons, and spirits that ruled 
in heaven and hell. ﬁProtect 
your souls from evil forces!ﬂ 
he warned them. ﬁLift your hearts
 in prayer! God and his angels 
will
 hear you!ﬂ 
 
He™s right,
 Mal™akh knew. 
But so will the demons.
 
 
Mal™akh had learned long ago 
that through proper application 
of the Art, a practitioner 
could open a portal to the spiritual realm. The 
invisible forces that existed there, much 
like man himself, came in many forms, bot
h good and evil. Those of Light healed, 
protected, and sought to bring 
order to the universe. Those 
of Dark functioned oppositely 
. . . bringing destruction and chaos. 
 
If properly summoned, the invi
sible forces could be pers
uaded to do a practitioner™s 
bidding on earth . . . thus inst
illing him with seemingly supernatural power. In exchange 
for helping the summoner, these forces requi
red offeringsŠprayers and praise for those 
of Light . . . and the spilling of blood for those of Dark. 
 
The greater the sacrifice, the grea
ter the power that is transferred.
 Mal™akh had begun 
his practice with the blood of
 inconsequential animals. Over time, however, his choices 
for sacrifice had become more bold. 
Tonight, I take the final step.
 
 
ﬁBeware!ﬂ the preacher shouted, warning of th
e coming Apocalypse. ﬁThe final battle for 
the souls of man will soon be fought!ﬂ 
 
Indeed,
 Mal™akh thought. 
And I shall become its greatest warrior.
 
 
This battle, of course, had begun long, long ag
o. In ancient Egypt, those who perfected 
the Art had become the great Adepts of hi
story, evolving beyond the masses to become 
true practitioners of Light. They moved as
 gods on earth. They built great temples of 
initiation to which neophytes traveled from 
around the world to partake of the wisdom. 
There arose a race of golden men. For a brie
f span of time, mankind seemed poised to 
elevate himself and transcend his earthly bonds. 
 
The golden age of the Ancient Mysteries.
 
 
And yet man, being of the flesh, was susceptibl
e to the sins of hubris, hatred, impatience, 
and greed. Over time, there were those who 
corrupted the Art, pe
rverting it and abusing 
its power for personal gain. They began usi
ng this perverted vers
ion to summon dark 
forces. A different Art evolved . . . a more pot
ent, immediate, and intoxicating influence. 
 
Such is my Art.
 
 
Such is my Great Work.
 
 
The illuminated Adepts and their esoteric fr
aternities witnessed the rising evil and saw 
that man was not using his newfound knowledge for the good of his species. And so they 
hid their wisdom to keep it from the eyes of the unworthy. Eventually, it was lost to 
history. 
 
With this came the Great Fall of Man. 
 
And a lasting darkness. 
 
To this day, the noble descendants of the Ad
epts soldiered on, grasping blindly for the 
Light, trying to recapture the lost power of 
their past, trying to k
eep the darkness at bay. 
They were the priests and priestesses of th
e churches, temples, and shrines of all the 
religions on earth. Time had erased the memori
es . . . detached them from their past. 
They no longer knew the Source from which their potent wisdom had once flowed. When 
they were asked about the divine mysteries of
 their forebears, the new custodians of faith 
vociferously disowned them, condemning them as heresy. 
 
Have they truly forgotten
? Mal™akh wondered. 
 
Echoes of the ancient Art still resonated in ev
ery corner of the globe, from the mystical 
Kabbalists of Judaism to the esoteric Sufis of Islam. Vestiges remained in the arcane 
rituals of Christianity, in 
its god-eating rites of Holy Communion, its hierarchies of 
saints, angels, and demons, its chanting and 
incantation, its holy cal
endar™s astrological 
underpinnings, its consecrated robes, and in it
s promise of everlasti
ng life. Even now, its 
priests dispelled evil spirits by swinging smoke-filled censers, ringing sacred bells, and 
sprinkling holy water. Christians still practiced the supernatural craft of exorcismŠan 
early practice of their faith that required th
e ability not only to cas
t out demons but to 
summon them. 
 
And yet they cannot see their past?
 
 
Nowhere was the church™s mystical past more 
evident than at her ep
icenter. In Vatican 
City, at the heart of St. Pete
r™s Square, stood the great Egypti
an obelisk. Carved thirteen 
hundred years before Jesus took his first breathŠthis numinous monolith had no 
relevance there, no link to modern Christian
ity. And yet there it was. At the core of 
Christ™s church. A stone beacon, screaming to
 be heard. A reminder to those few sages 
who remembered where it all began. This 
church, born of the womb of the Ancient 
Mysteries, still bore her rites and symbols. 
 
One symbol above all.
 
 
Adorning her altars, vestments, spires, 
and Scripture was the singular image of 
ChristianityŠthat of a precious
, sacrificed human being. Ch
ristianity, more than any 
other faith, understood the transformative power
 of sacrifice. Even now, to honor the 
sacrifice made by Jesus, his followers proffe
red their own feeble gestures of personal 
sacrifice . . . fasting, Lent
en renunciati
on, tithing. 
 
All of those offerings are impotent, of course
. Without blood . . . ther
e is no true sacrifice.
 
 
The powers of darkness had long embraced blood sacrifice, and in doing so, they had 
grown so strong that the powers of goodness no
w struggled to keep them in check. Soon 
the Light would be entirely consumed, and 
the practitioners of darkness would move 
freely through the minds of men. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 97 
 
 
 
ﬁEight Franklin Square
 must
 exist,ﬂ Sato insist
ed. ﬁLook it up again!ﬂ 
 
Nola Kaye sat at her desk and adjusted her 
headset. ﬁMa™am, I™ve checked everywhere . . 
. that address doesn™t exist in D.C.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut I™m on the roof of 
One
 Franklin Square,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁThere has to be an 
Eight
!ﬂ 
 
Director Sato™s on a roof?
 ﬁHold on.ﬂ Nola began r
unning a new search. She was 
considering telling the OS di
rector about the hacker, but 
Sato seemed fixated on Eight 
Franklin Square at the mome
nt. Besides, Nola still didn
™t have all the information. 
Where™s that damned sys-sec, anyway?
 
 
ﬁOkay,ﬂ Nola said, eyeing her screen, ﬁI s
ee the problem. One Franklin Square is the 
name
 of the building . . . not the address.
 The address is actually 1301 K Street.ﬂ 
 
The news seemed to confound the director. ﬁNola, I don™t have time to explainŠthe 
pyramid clearly points to the a
ddress Eight Franklin Square.ﬂ 
 
Nola sat bolt upright. 
The pyramid points to
 a specific location?
 
 
ﬁThe inscription,ﬂ Sato continued, ﬁreads: ‚The secret hi
des within The OrderŠEight 
Franklin Square.™ﬂ 
 
Nola could scarcely imagine. ﬁAn 
order
 like . . . a Masonic or fraternal order?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI assume so,ﬂ Sato replied. 
 
Nola thought a moment, and then began typi
ng again. ﬁMa™am, maybe the street numbers 
on the square changed over the years? I mean, 
if this pyramid is as old as legend claims, 
maybe the numbers on Franklin Square were 
different when the pyramid was built? I™m 
now running a search 
without
 the number eight . . . for . . 
. ‚the order™ . . . ‚Franklin 
Square™ . . . and ‚Washington, D.C.™ . . . and this way, we might get some idea if 
there™sŠﬂ She stalled midsentence as the search results appeared. 
 
ﬁWhat have you got?ﬂ Sato demanded.  
 
Nola stared at the first result on the listŠa 
spectacular image of 
the Great Pyramid of 
EgyptŠwhich served as the thematic backdrop for the  
home page dedicated to a building on Frank
lin Square. The building was unlike any other 
building on the square. 
 
Or in the entire city, for that matter.
 
 
What stopped Nola cold was not the buildin
g™s bizarre architectur
e, but rather the 
description of its 
purpose
. According to the Web site, this
 unusual edifice was built as a 
sacred mystical shrine, de
signed by . . . and designed 
for
 . . . an ancient secret order. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
 98 
 
 
 
Robert Langdon
 regained consciousness with a crippling headache. 
 
Where am I?
 
 
Wherever he was, it was dark. D
eep-cave dark, and deathly silent. 
 
He was lying on his back with his arms at hi
s side. Confused, he tried moving his fingers 
and toes, relieved to find they moved freely with no pain. 
What happened?
 With the 
exception of his headache and the profound da
rkness, everything seemed more or less 
normal. 
 
Almost everything. 
 
Langdon realized he was lying on a hard floor
 that felt unusually smooth, like a sheet of 
glass. Stranger still, he could feel that the 
slick surface was in direct contact with his bare 
flesh . . . shoulders, back, buttocks, thighs, calves. 
Am I naked?
 Puzzled, he ran his hands 
over his body. 
 
Jesus! Where the hell are my clothes?
 
 
In the darkness, the cobwebs began to lift, and Langdon saw flashes of memory . . . 
frightening snapshots . . . a dead CIA agent 
. . . the face of a tattooed beast . . . Langdon™s 
head smashing into the floor. The images 
came faster . . . and now he recalled the 
sickening image of Kather
ine Solomon bound and gagged on 
the dining-room floor. 
 
My God!
 
 
Langdon sat bolt upright, and as he did, his forehead smashed into something suspended 
only inches above him. Pain exploded through 
his skull and he fell back, teetering near 
unconsciousness. Groggy, he reached up with hi
s hands, groping in the darkness to find 
the obstacle. What he found made
 no sense to him. It seemed this room™s ceiling was less 
than a foot above him. 
What in the world?
 As he spread his arms to his sides in an 
attempt to roll over, both of
 his hands hit sidewalls. 
 
The truth now dawned on him. Robert
 Langdon was not in a room at all. 
 
I™m in a box!
 
 In the darkness of his small, coffinlike 
container, Langdon began pounding wildly with his fist. He shouted over and over for help. The terror that gripped him deepened with 
each passing instant until it was intolerable. 

 I have been buried alive.  The lid of Langdon™s strange coffin refused to budge, even with the full force of his arms 
and legs pushing upward in wild panic. The box, from all he could tell, was made of 
heavy fiberglass. Airtight. Soundproof. Lightproof. Escape-proof. 
 I am going to suffocate alone in this box.  He thought of the deep well into which he had fallen as a young boy, and of the terrifying 
night he spent treading water alone in the darkness of a bottomless pit. That trauma had 
scarred Langdon™s psyche, burdening him with an overwhelming phobia of enclosed 
spaces. 
 
Tonight, buried alive, Robert Langdon was living his ultimate nightmare. 
 
Katherine Solomon trembled in silence on the 
floor of Mal™akh™s dining room. The sharp 
wire around her wrists and ankles had already cut into her, and the slightest movements 
seemed only to tighten her bonds. 

 
The tattooed man had brutally knocked 
Langdon unconscious and dragged his limp body 
across the floor along with his leather bag and the stone pyramid. Where they had gone, 
Katherine had no idea. The agent who had accompanied them was dead. She had not 

heard a sound in many minutes, and she w
ondered if the tattooed man and Langdon were 
still inside the house. She had been trying to scream for help, but with each attempt, the 
rag in her mouth crept back dangerously closer to her windpipe.  
Now she felt approaching footsteps on the floor, and she turned her head, hoping against hope that someone was coming to help. The massive silhouette of her captor materialized 

in the hallway. Katherine recoiled as she fl
ashed on the image of him standing in her 
family home ten years earlier. 

 He killed my family.  Now he strode toward her. Langdon was nowhere to be seen. The man crouched down 
and gripped her around the waist, hoisting her roughly onto his shoulder. The wire sliced into her wrists, and the rag 
muffled her muted cries of pa
in. He carried her down the hallway toward the living room, where, earlie
r today, the two of them had calmly sipped 

tea together. 

 Where is he taking me?!  He carried Katherine across the living room and stopped directly
 in front of the large oil painting of the Three Graces that she had admired this afternoon. 
 
ﬁYou mentioned you liked this painting,ﬂ the ma
n whispered, his lips practically touching her ear. ﬁI™m glad. It may be the last thing of beauty you see.ﬂ  
With that, he reached out and pressed his palm 
into the right side of the enormous frame. 
To Katherine™s shock, the painting rotated into
 the wall, turning on a 
central pivot like a revolving door. A hidden doorway.  
Katherine tried to wriggle free, but the ma
n held her firmly, carrying her through the 
opening behind the canvas. As the Three Graces
 pivoted shut behind them, she could see heavy insulation on the back of the canvas. Whatever sounds were made back here were 
apparently not meant to be heard by the outside world. 

 
The space behind the painting was cramped, more like a hallway than a room. The man 

carried her to the far side and opened a heavy door, carrying her through it onto a small landing. Katherine found herself looking down a narrow ramp into a deep basement. She 

drew a breath to scream, but
 the rag was choking her.  
The incline was steep and narrow. The walls on 
either side were made of cement, awash 
in a bluish light that seemed to emanate fr
om below. The air that wafted up was warm 
and pungent, laden with an eerie blend of smells . . . the sharp bite of chemicals, the 
smooth calm of incense, the earthy musk of hu
man sweat, and, pervading it all, a distinct 
aura of visceral, animal fear. 

 ﬁYour science impressed me,ﬂ the man whis
pered as they reached the bottom of the 
ramp. ﬁI hope 
mine impresses you.ﬂ 
  
 
 CHAPTER 99   
 
CIA field agent Turner Simkins crouched in the dar
kness of Franklin Park and kept his steady gaze on Warren Bellamy
. Nobody had taken the bait yet, but it was still early. 
 
Simkins™s transceiver beeped, and he activ
ated it, hoping one of his men had spotted 
something. But it was Sato. She had new information. 

 
Simkins listened and agreed with her concern. 
ﬁHold on,ﬂ he said. ﬁI™ll see if I can get a 
visual.ﬂ He crawled through the bushes in which he was hiding and peered back in the direction from which he had entered the square. After some maneuvering, he finally 
opened a sight line.  Holy shit.  He was staring at a building that looked like an Old World mosque. Nestled between two 
much larger buildings, the Moorish facade was made of gleaming terra-cotta tile laid in 
intricate multicolored designs. Above the th
ree massive doors, two tiers of lancet 
windows looked as if Arabian archers might a
ppear and open fire if anyone approached uninvited. 
 
ﬁI see it,ﬂ Simkins said. 

 
ﬁAny activity?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNothing.ﬂ 
 
ﬁGood. I need you to reposition and watch it very
 carefully. It™s called the Almas Shrine 
Temple, and it™s the headquarters of a mystical order.ﬂ 

 
Simkins had worked in the D.C. area for a l
ong time but was not familiar with this temple 
or any ancient mystical order he
adquartered on Franklin Square.  
ﬁThis building,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁbelongs to a group called the Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNever heard of them.ﬂ 
 ﬁI think you have,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁThey™re an appendant body of the Masons, more commonly known as the Shriners.ﬂ 
 
Simkins shot a dubious glance at the ornate building. 
The Shriners? The guys who build hospitals for kids? He could imagine no ﬁorderﬂ less ominous sounding than a fraternity 
of philanthropists who wore little red fezzes and 
marched in parades. 
 
Even so, Sato™s concerns were valid. ﬁMa™am, if 
our target realizes that this building is in 
fact ‚The Order™ on Franklin Square, he won™t need the address. He™ll simply bypass the rendezvous and go directly to the correct location.ﬂ  
ﬁMy thoughts exactly. Keep an eye on the entrance.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ 

 
ﬁAny word from Agent Hartmann in Kalorama Heights?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo, ma™am. You asked him to phone you directly.ﬂ 

 ﬁWell, he hasn™t.ﬂ 
 
Odd, Simkins thought, checking his watch. 
He™s overdue.  
 
 
 CHAPTER 100    Robert Langdon lay shivering, naked and alone in total blackness. Paralyzed by fear, he was no longer pounding or shouting. Instead, he had closed his eyes and was doing his 
best to control his hammering heart and his panicked breathing.  
You are lying beneath a vast, nighttime sky, he tried to convince himself. 
There is nothing above you but miles of wide-open space.  
This calming visualization had been the only way he had managed to survive a recent 

stint in an enclosed MRI machine . . . that 
and a triple dose of Valium. Tonight, however, 
the visualization was having no effect whatsoever. 
 
The rag in Katherine Solomon™s mouth had 
shifted backward and was all but choking her. Her captor had carried her down a narrow ramp and into a dark basement corridor. 
At the far end of the hall, she had glimpsed a room lit with an eerie reddish-purple light, but they™d never made it that far. The ma
n had stopped instead at a small side room, 
carried her inside, and placed her on a wooden chair. He had set her down with her bound 

wrists behind the chair back so she could not move. 

 
Now Katherine could feel the wire on her wrists slicing deeper into
 her flesh. The pain barely registered next to the rising panic she was feeling over being unable to breathe. The cloth in her mouth was slipping deeper in
to her throat, and she felt herself gagging reflexively. Her vision started to tunnel.  
Behind her, the tattooed man closed the r
oom™s lone door and flipped on the light. 
Katherine™s eyes were watering profusely 
now, and she could no longer differentiate objects in her immediate surroundings.
 Everything had become a blur.  
A distorted vision of colorful flesh appeared before her,
 and Katherine felt her eyes 
starting to flutter as she teetered on the brink of unconsciousness. A scale-covered arm reached out and yanked the rag from her mouth. 

 
Katherine gasped, inhaling deep breaths, coughing and choking as her lungs flooded with 

precious air. Slowly, her vision began to clear, and she found herself looking into the demon™s face. The visage was barely human. 
Blanketing his neck, face, and shaved head 
was an astounding pattern of bizarre tattooed symbols. With the 
exception of a small 
circle on top of his head, every inch of his body appeared to be decorated. A massive 
double-headed phoenix on his chest glared at her through nipple eyes like some kind of 
ravenous vulture, patiently waiting for her death.  
ﬁOpen your mouth,ﬂ the man whispered. 

 
Katherine stared at the monster with total revulsion. What?  
ﬁOpen your mouth,ﬂ the man repeated. ﬁOr the cloth goes back in.ﬂ 

 
Trembling, Katherine opened her mouth. Th
e man extended his thick, tattooed index finger, inserting it between her lips. When he touched her tongue, Katherine thought she would vomit. He extracted his wet finger a
nd raised it to the top of his shaved head. Closing his eyes, he massaged her saliva into 
his small circular patch of untattooed flesh. 
 
Repulsed, Katherine looked away. 
 
The room in which she was sitting appeared 
to be a boiler room of some sortŠpipes on 
the walls, gurgling sounds, fluorescent lights. Before she could take in her surroundings, though, her gaze stopped dead on something besi
de her on the floor. A pile of clothingŠ
turtleneck, tweed sport coat, loafers, Mickey Mouse watch. 

 
ﬁMy God!ﬂ She wheeled back to the tattooed animal before her. ﬁWhat have you done 

with Robert?!ﬂ 
 ﬁShh,ﬂ the man whispered. ﬁOr he™ll hear you.
ﬂ He stepped to one side and motioned 
behind him. 
 
Langdon was not there. All Katherine saw was a huge black fibergla
ss box. Its shape bore an unsettling resemblance to the heavy crates in which corpses were shipped back from 

war. Two massive clasps firmly locked the box shut. 

 
ﬁHe™s inside
?!ﬂ Katherine blurted. ﬁBut . . . he™ll suffocate!ﬂ  
ﬁNo, he won™t,ﬂ the man said, poi
nting to a series of transparent pipes that ran along the wall into the bottom of the crate. ﬁHe™ll only 
wish he could.ﬂ  
In total darkness, Langdon listened intently to the muffled vibrations
 he now heard from 
the outside world. Voices? He began pounding on the box and shouting at the top of his lungs. ﬁHelp! Can anyone hear me?!ﬂ 

 
Far off, a muted voice called out. ﬁRobert! My God, no! NO!ﬂ 

 
He knew the voice. It was Katherine, and she sounded terrified. Even so, it was a welcome sound. Langdon drew a breath to call out 
to her, but he stopped short, feeling an unexpected sensation at the back of his neck. A faint breeze seemed to be emanating from 
the bottom of the box. 
How is that possible? He lay very still, taking stock. Yes, definitely.
 He could feel the tiny hairs on the back of his neck being tickled by air movement. 
 
Instinctively, Langdon began feeling along the floor of the box, searching for the source 

of the air. It took only a moment to locate. 
There™s a tiny vent!
 The small perforated 
opening felt similar to a drain plate on a sink 
or tub, except that a soft, steady breeze was now coming up through it. 

 He™s pumping air in for me. He doesn™t want me to suffocate.  Langdon™s relief was short-lived. A terrifying sound was now emanating up through the 
holes in the vent. It was the unmistakable 
gurgle of flowing liquid . . . coming his way. 
 
Katherine stared in disbelief at the clear sh
aft of liquid that was 
progressing down one of the pipes toward Langdon™s crate. The scene 
looked like some kind of twisted stage magician™s act. 

 He™s pumping water into the crate?!  Katherine strained at her bonds, ignoring the deep bite of the wires around her wrists. All she could do was look on in panic. She could hear Langdon pounding in desperation, but as the water reached the underside of the 
container, the pounding stopped. There was a 
moment of terrified silence. Then the poundi
ng started again with renewed desperation.  ﬁLet him out!ﬂ Katherine begged. 
ﬁPlease! You can™t do this!ﬂ  ﬁDrowning is a terrible death, you know.ﬂ The man spoke calmly as he paced around her 
in circles. ﬁYour assistant, Trish, could tell you that.ﬂ   
Katherine heard his words, but she could barely process them.   
ﬁYou may remember that I almost drowned 
once,ﬂ the man whispered. ﬁIt was on your 
family™s estate in Potomac. Your brother shot
 me, and I fell through the ice, out at Zach™s 
bridge.ﬂ  
 
Katherine glared at him, filled with loathing. 
The night you killed my mother.  
ﬁThe gods protected me that night,ﬂ he sai
d. ﬁAnd they showed me the way . . . to 
become one of them.ﬂ 

 
The water gurgling into the box behind Langdon™s head felt warm . . . body temperature. 
The fluid was already several inches deep and had  completely swallowed the back of his nake
d body. As it began creeping up his rib cage, 
Langdon felt a stark reality closing in fast.  I™m going to die.  With renewed panic, he raised his 
arms and began pounding wildly again. 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 101   
 
ﬁYou™ve got to let him out!ﬂ Katherine begged, 
crying now. ﬁWe™ll do whatever you 
want!ﬂ She could hear Langdon pounding more fran
tically as the water flowed into his container. 
 
The tattooed man just smiled. ﬁYou™re easier than
 your brother. The things I had to do to get Peter to tell me his secrets . . .ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhere is he?!ﬂ she demanded. ﬁWhere is Pe
ter?! Tell me! We did exactly what you 
wanted! We solved the pyramid andŠﬂ 

 
ﬁNo, you did not solve the pyramid. You played a game. You withheld information and 
brought a government agent to my home. 
Hardly behavior I intend to reward.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWe didn™t have a choice,ﬂ she replied, choking back the tears. ﬁThe CIA is looking for 

you. They made us travel with an agent. I™ll tell you everything. Just let Robert out!ﬂ 

Katherine could hear Langdon shouting and pounding in the crate, and she could see the water flowing through the pipe. She knew he didn™t have a lot of time. 
 
In front of her, the tattooed man spoke cal
mly, stroking his chin. ﬁI assume there are 
agents waiting for me at Franklin Square?ﬂ 

 
Katherine said nothing, and the man placed his massive palms on her shoulders, slowly 

pulling her forward. With her arms still wire
-bound be hind the chair back, her shoulders strained, burning with pain, threatening to dislocate.  
ﬁYes!ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁThere 
are agents at Franklin Square!ﬂ  
He pulled harder. ﬁWhat is 
the address on the capstone?ﬂ 
 
The pain in her wrists and shoulders grew unbearable, but Katherine said nothing.   
ﬁYou can tell me now, Katherine, or I™l
l break your arms and ask you again.ﬂ 
 ﬁEight!ﬂ she gasped in pain. ﬁThe missing number is 
eight! The capstone says: ‚The secret hides within The OrderŠEight Franklin Square!™ I swear it. I don™t know what else to tell you! It™s 
Eight Franklin Square!ﬂ 
 The man still did not release her shoulders. 

 
ﬁThat™s all I know!ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁThat™s the address! Let go of me! Let Robert out of 
that tank!ﬂ 
 
ﬁI would . . .ﬂ the man said, ﬁbut there™s one problem.
 I can™t go to Eight Franklin Square without being caught. Tell me, 
what™s at that address?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t know!ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd the symbols on the base of the pyramid? On the underside? Do you know 
their meaning?ﬂ  

 
ﬁWhat symbols on the base?ﬂ Katherine had no 
idea what he was talking about. ﬁThe bottom has no symbols. It™s smooth, blank stone!ﬂ 

 
Apparently immune to the muffled cries for he
lp emanating from the coffinlike crate, the 

tattooed man calmly padded over to Langdon™s da
y-bag and retrieved the stone pyramid. 
Then he returned to Katherin
e and held it up before her eyes so she could see the base. 
 
When Katherine saw the engraved sym
bols, she gasped in bewilderment. 
 
But . . . that™s impossible!    
The bottom of the pyramid was entire
ly covered with intricate carvings. There was nothing there before! I™m sure of it! She had no idea what these symbols could possibly 
mean. They seemed to span every mystical
 tradition, including many she could not even 
place. 
 Total chaos.  ﬁI . . . have no idea what this means,ﬂ she said. 

 
ﬁNor do I,ﬂ her captor said. ﬁFortunately, we have a specialist at our disposal.ﬂ He 

glanced at the crate. ﬁLet™s ask him, shall we
?ﬂ He carried the pyramid toward the crate. 
 
For a brief instant of hope, Katherine thought he was going to unclasp
 the lid. Instead, he sat calmly on top of the box, reached down, and s
lid a small panel to one side, revealing a 
Plexiglas window in the top of the tank. 
 
Light!  
Langdon covered his eyes, squinting into the ray of light that now streamed in from 

above. As his eyes adjusted, hope turned to confusion. He was looking up through what appeared to be a window in the top of his crate. Through the window, he saw a white 
ceiling and a fluorescent light. 
 Without warning, the tattooed face appeared above him, peering down. 
 
ﬁWhere is Katherine?!ﬂ Langdon shouted. ﬁLet me out!ﬂ 

 
The man smiled. ﬁYour friend Katherine is here with me,ﬂ the man said. ﬁI have the 

power to spare her life. Your life as well. Bu
t your time is short, so I suggest you listen 

carefully.ﬂ 

 
Langdon could barely hear him through the gl
ass, and the water had risen higher, 
creeping across his chest. 

 
ﬁAre you aware,ﬂ the man asked, ﬁthat there are symbols on the 
base of the pyramid?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes!ﬂ Langdon shouted, having seen the extensive array of symbols when the pyramid 
had lain on the floor upstairs. ﬁBut I have no idea what they mean! You need to go to 
Eight Franklin Square! The answer is 
there! That™s what the capstoneŠﬂ  
ﬁProfessor, you and I both know the CIA is waiting for me there. I have no intention of 
walking into a trap. Besides, I didn™t need the street number. There is only 
one building on that square that could possibly be relevantŠthe Almas 
Shrine Temple.ﬂ He paused, 
staring down at Langdon. ﬁThe Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of 
the Mystic Shrine.ﬂ  
Langdon was confused. He was familiar with th
e Almas Temple, but he had forgotten it 
was on Franklin Square. The Shriners are . . . ﬁThe Orderﬂ? Their temple sits atop a secret staircase?
 It made no historical sense wh
atsoever, but Langdon was in no position at the moment to debate history. ﬁYes!ﬂ he 
shouted. ﬁThat must be it! The secret hides within The Order!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™re familiar with the building?ﬂ 

 
ﬁAbsolutely!ﬂ Langdon raised his throbbing head to keep his ears above the quickly rising liquid. ﬁI can help you! Let me out!ﬂ 

 
ﬁSo you believe you can tell me what this temple has to do with the symbols on the base 

of the pyramid?ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes! Let me just look at the symbols!ﬂ 

 
ﬁVery well, then. Let™s see what you come up with.ﬂ 
 
Hurry! With the warm liquid rising around him, Langdon pushed up on the lid, willing 
the man to unclasp it. 
Please! Hurry! But the lid never opened. Instead, the base of the pyramid suddenly appeared, hoveri
ng above the Plexiglas window.  
Langdon stared up in panic. 
 ﬁI trust this view is close enough for you?ﬂT
he man held the pyramid in his tattooed 
hands. ﬁThink fast, Professor. I™m gue
ssing you have less than sixty seconds.ﬂ   
 
 CHAPTER 102   
 Robert Langdon had often heard it said that an animal, when cornered, was capable of 
miraculous feats of strength. Nonetheless, wh
en he threw his full force into the underside of his crate, nothing budged at all. Around him,
 the liquid continued rising steadily. With 
no more than six inches of breathing room
 left, Langdon had lifted his head into the pocket of air that remained. He was now f
ace-to-face with the Plexiglas window, his eyes 
only inches away from the underside of th
e stone pyramid whose baffling engraving 
hovered above him. 
 I have no idea what this means.  Concealed for over a century beneath a hardened mixture of wax and stone dust, the 
Masonic Pyramid™s final inscription was now laid bare. The engraving was a perfectly 

square grid of symbols from every tradit
ion imaginableŠalchemical, astrological, 

heraldic, angelic, magical, numeric, sigilic, Gr
eek, Latin. As a totality, this was symbolic 
anarchyŠa bowl of alphabet soup whose le
tters came from dozens of different 
languages, cultures, and time periods. 

 Total chaos.    
Symbologist Robert Langdon, in his wildest 
academic interpretations, could not fathom 
how this grid of symbols could be 
deciphered to mean 
anything at all. Order from this chaos? Impossible.  
The liquid was now creeping over his Adam™s a
pple, and Langdon could feel his level of terror rising along with it. He continued banging on the tank. The pyramid stared back at 
him tauntingly. 

 
In frantic desperation, Langdon focused every bi
t of his mental energy on the chessboard 
of symbols. 
What could they possibly mean? Unfortunately, the assortment seemed so 

disparate that he could not even imagine where to begin. 
They™re not even from the same eras in history!  
Outside the tank, her voice muffled but audibl
e, Katherine could be heard tearfully begging for Langdon™s release. Despite his failure to see a solution, the prospect of death seemed to motivate every cell in his body to 
find one. He felt a strange clarity of mind, 
unlike anything he had ever experienced. Think! He scanned the grid intensely, searching for some clueŠa pattern, a hidden word, a sp
ecial icon, anything at allŠbut he saw only a grid of unrelated symbols. 
Chaos.  
With each passing second, Langdon had begun to feel an eerie numbness overtaking his 

body. It was as if his very flesh were preparing to shield his mind from the pain of death. 
The water was now threatening to pour into his 
ears, and he lifted his head as far as he could, pushing it against the top of the crate. Frightening images began flashing before 
his eyes. A boy in New England treading water at the bottom of a dark well. A man in 
Rome trapped beneath a skel
eton in an overturned coffin.  Katherine™s shouts were growing more fran
tic. From all Langdon could hear, she was 
trying to reason
 with a madmanŠinsisting that 
Langdon could not be expected to decipher the pyramid without going to visit 
the Almas Temple. ﬁThat building obviously 
holds the missing piece to this puzzle! How can
 Robert decipher the pyramid without all the information?!ﬂ 

 
Langdon appreciated her efforts, and yet he felt certain that ﬁEight Franklin Squareﬂ was not pointing to the Almas Temple. 
The time line is all wrong! According to legend, the Masonic Pyramid was created in the mid-
1800s, decades before the Shriners even 

existed. In fact, Langdon realized, it was probably before the square was even called Franklin Square. The capstone could not possibly have been pointing to an unbuilt 

building at a nonexistent address. Whatever ﬁE
ight Franklin Squareﬂ was pointing to . . . 
it had to exist in 1850.  
Unfortunately, Langdon was drawing a total blank. 
 
He probed his memory banks for anyt
hing that could possibly fit the  
time line. 
Eight Franklin Square? Something that was in existence in 1850? Langdon came up with nothing. The liquid was trickling in
to his ears now. Fighting his terror, he stared up at the grid of symbols on the glass. 
I don™t understand the connection! In a 
petrified frenzy, his mind began spewing all 
the far-flung parallels it could generate.  
Eight Franklin Square . . . squares . . . this grid of symbols is a square . . . the square and 
the compass are Masonic symbols . . . Masonic altars are square . . . squares have ninety-degree angles. The water kept rising, but Langdon blocked it out. Eight Franklin . . . eight . . . this grid is eight-by-eight . . . Franklin has eight letters . . . ﬁThe Orderﬂ has eight letters . . . 8 is the rotated symbol for infinity . . . eight is 
the number of destruction in numerology . . .  
Langdon had no idea. 
 
Outside the tank, Katherine was still pleading, but Langdon™s hearing was now intermittent as the water was sloshing around his head. 

 
ﬁ . . . impossible without knowing . . . capstone
™s message clearly . . . the secret hides 
withinŠﬂ 
 
Then she was gone. 
 
Water poured into Langdon™s ears, blotting out the last of Katherine™s voice. A sudden 

womblike silence engulfed him, and Langdon 
realized he truly was going to die.  The secret hides withinŠ
  Katherine™s final words echoed through the hush of his tomb. 
 The secret hides within . . .  Strangely, Langdon realized he had heard these exact words many times before. 
 The secret hides . . . within.  Even now, it seemed, the Ancient Mysteries we
re taunting him. ﬁThe secret hides withinﬂ 
was the core tenet of the mysteries, urging man kind to seek God 
not in the heavens 
above . . . but rather within himself. 
The secret hides within.
 It was the message of all the 
great mystical teachers. 

 
The kingdom of God is within you, said Jesus Christ. 
 
Know thyself, said Pythagoras.  
Know ye not that ye are gods, said Hermes Trismegistus. 
 
The list went on and on . . . 
 
All the mystical teachings of the ages 
had attempted to convey this one idea. 
The secret 
hides within.
 Even so, mankind continued looking to
 the heavens for the face of God.  This realization, for Langdon, now became an ultimate irony. Right  
now, with his eyes facing the heavens like 
all the blind men who preceded him, Robert 
Langdon suddenly saw the light.  
It hit him like a bolt from above. 
The  secret hides 
 within The Order 
 Eight Franklin Square  
 
In a flash he understood. 
 
The message on the capstone was suddenly crys
tal clear. Its meaning had been staring 
him in the face all night. The text on the capst
one, like the Masonic Pyramid itself, was a 
symbolonŠa code in piecesŠa message writ
ten in parts. The capstone™s meaning was 
camouflaged in so simple a manner that La
ngdon could scarcely believe he and Katherine had not spotted it.  
More astonishing still, Langdon now realized that the message on the capstone did 
indeed
 reveal exactly how to decipher the grid of symbols on the base of the pyramid. It was so 

very simple. Exactly as Peter Solomon ha
d promised, the golden capstone was a potent talisman with the power to
 bring order from chaos. 
 
Langdon began pounding on the lid and shouting, ﬁI know! I know!ﬂ 
 
Above him, the stone pyramid lifted off and 
hovered away. In its place, the tattooed face 
reappeared, its chilling visage staring down through the small window. 
 
ﬁI solved it!ﬂ Langdon shouted. ﬁLet me out!ﬂ  

 
When the tattooed man spoke, Langdon™s s
ubmerged ears heard nothing. His eyes, 
however, saw the lips speak two words. 
ﬁTell me.ﬂ  
ﬁI will!ﬂ Langdon screamed, the water almost
 to his eyes. ﬁLet me out! I™ll explain 
everything!ﬂ It™s so simple.
  
The man™s lips moved again. 
ﬁTell me now . . . or die.ﬂ
  
With the water rising through the final inch of air space, Langdon tipped his head back to 

keep his mouth above the waterline. As he
 did so, warm liquid poured into his eyes, 
blurring his vision. Arching his back, he pressed his mouth ag
ainst the Plexiglas window.  
Then, with his last few seconds of air, Robert Langdon shared the secret of how to decipher the Masonic Pyramid. 

 
As he finished speaking, the liquid rose around his lips. Instinctively, Langdon drew a final breath and clamped his mouth shut. A mo
ment later, the fluid covered him entirely, 
reaching the top of his tomb and spreading out across the Plexiglas. 

 
He did it, Mal™akh realized. Langdon figured out how to solve the pyramid.  
The answer was so simple. So obvious. 

 
Beneath the window, the submerged face of Robert Langdon stared up at him with 

desperate and beseeching eyes. 

 
Mal™akh shook his head at him and slowly 
mouthed the words: ﬁThank you, Professor. 
Enjoy the afterlife.ﬂ 

 
   CHAPTER 103   
 
As a serious swimmer, Robert Langdon had often wondered what it would feel like to drown. He now knew he was going to learn firsthand. Although he could hold his breath 
longer than most people, he could already feel his body reacting to the absence of air. Carbon dioxide was accumulating in his blood, br
inging with it the instinctual urge to inhale. Do not breathe!
 The reflex to inhale was increa
sing in intensity with each passing 
moment. Langdon knew very soon he would reach what was called the breath-hold 

breakpointŠthat critical moment at which a 
person could no longer voluntarily hold his breath. 
 
Open the lid!
 Langdon™s instinct was to pound and struggle, but he knew better than to waste valuable oxygen. All he could do was stare up through the blur of water above him 

and hope. The world outside was now only a hazy patch of light above the Plexiglas window. His core muscles had begun bur
ning, and he knew hypoxia was setting in. 
 
Suddenly a beautiful and ghostly face appeared, gazing down at him. It was Katherine, 
her soft features looking almost ethereal
 through the veil of liquid. Their eyes met 
through the Plexiglas window, and for an instant, Langdon thought he was saved. Katherine!
 Then he heard her muted cries of horro
r and realized she was being held there 
by their captor. The tattooed monster was forci
ng her to bear witness to what was about 
to happen. 
 Katherine, I™m sorry . . .  In this strange, dark place, trapped underwater, Langdon strained to comprehend that these would be his final moments 
of life. Soon he would cease to exist . . . everything he 
was . . . or had ever been . . . or would ever be . . . was ending. When
 his brain died, all of the memories held in his gray matter, along 
with all of the knowledge he had acquired, would simply evaporate in a flood of chemical reactions. 

 
In this moment, Robert Langdon re
alized his true insignificance in the universe. It was as 
lonely and humbling a feeling as he had ever  

experienced. Almost thankfully, he coul
d feel the breath-hold breakpoint arriving.  
The moment was upon him. 

 
Langdon™s lungs forced out their spent contents, collapsing in eager preparation to inhale. Still he held out an instant longer. His final second. Then, like a man no longer able to 
hold his hand to a burning stove, he gave himself over to fate. 
 Reflex overruled reason.  
His lips parted. 
 
His lungs expanded. 
 
And the liquid came pouring in. 

 
The pain that filled his chest was greate
r than Langdon had ever imagined. The liquid 
burned as it poured into his lungs. Instantly, the pain shot upward into his skull, and he felt like his head was being crushed in a vise. There was great thundering in his ears, and through it all, Katherine Solomon was screaming. 

 
There was a blinding flash of light. 
 
And then blackness. 
 
Robert Langdon was gone. 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 104   
 It™s over.  Katherine Solomon had stopped screaming. The 
drowning she had just witnessed had left her catatonic, virtually paralyzed with shock and despair.  
Beneath the Plexiglas window, Langdon™s dead eyes stared past her into empty space. 
His frozen expression was one of pain and regr
et. The last tiny air bubbles trickled out of his lifeless mouth, and then, as if consenting to give up his ghost, the Harvard professor 
slowly began sinking to the bottom of the tank . . . where he disappeared into the 
shadows. 
 
He™s gone. Katherine felt numb. 

 
The tattooed man reached down, and with pitiless finality, he slid the small viewing 

window closed, sealing Langdon™s corpse inside.  
Then he smiled at her. ﬁShall we?ﬂ 

 
Before Katherine could respond, he hoisted her grief-stricken body onto his shoulder, turned out the light, and carri
ed her out of the room. With a few powerful strides, he 
transported her to the end of the hall, into 
a large space that seemed
 to be bathed in a reddish-purple light. The room smelled like incen
se. He carried her to a square table in the center of the room and dropped her hard on her back, knocking the wind out of her. 

The surface felt rough and cold. 
Is this stone?  
Katherine had hardly gotten her bearings before the man had removed the wire from her 
wrists and ankles. Instinctively, she attempted 
to fight him off, but her cramped arms and 
legs barely responded. He now began strapping her to the table with heavy leather bands, cinching one strap across her knees and then buckling a second across her hips, pinning 
her arms at her sides. Then he placed a 
final strap across her sternum, just above her 
breasts. 
 
It had all taken only moments, and Kather
ine was again immobilized. Her wrists and 
ankles throbbed now as the circ
ulation returned to her limbs. 
 
ﬁOpen your mouth,ﬂ the man whispere
d, licking his own tattooed lips.  
Katherine clenched her teeth in revulsion.  
The man again reached out with his index 
finger and ran it slowly around her lips, making her skin crawl. She clenched her te
eth tighter. The tattooed man chuckled and, 
using his other hand, found a pressure point 
on her neck and squeezed. Katherine™s jaw 
instantly dropped open. She could feel his finger entering her mouth and running along her tongue. She gagged and tried to bite it, but the finger was already gone. Still grinning, he raised his moist fingertip before her ey
es. Then he closed his eyes and, once again, rubbed her saliva into the bare circle of flesh on his head.  
The man sighed and slowly opened his eyes. The
n, with an eerie calm, he turned and left 

the room. 

 
In the sudden silence, Katherine could feel her heart pounding. Directly over her, an unusual series of lights seemed to be modul
ating from purple red to a deep crimson, 
illuminating the room™s low ceiling. When she saw the ceiling, all she could do was stare. 

Every inch was covered with drawings. The mind-boggling collage above her appeared to 
depict the celestial sky. Stars, planets, and constellations mingled with astrological 
symbols, charts, and formulas. There were arro
ws predicting elliptical orbits, geometric 
symbols indicating angles of ascension, and zodiacal creatures peering down at her. It 

looked like a mad scientist had go
tten loose in the Sistine Chapel.  
Turning her head, Katherine looked away, but the wall to her left was no better. A series of candles on medieval floor stands shed a 
flickering glow on a wall that was completely 
hidden beneath pages of text, photos, and drawings. Some
 of the pages looked like papyrus or vellum torn from ancient books; 
others were obviously from newer texts; 
mixed in were photographs, drawings, maps, a
nd schematics; all of them appeared to 

have been glued to the wall with meticulous
 care. A spiderweb of strings had been thumbtacked across them, interconnecting th
em in limitless chaotic possibilities. 
 Katherine again looked away, turning her head in the other direction. 
 
Unfortunately, this provided the most terrifying view of all. 

 
Adjacent to the stone slab on which she was 
strapped, there stood a small side counter 
that instantly reminded her of an instrument
 table from a hospital 
operating room. On the 
counter was arranged a series of objectsŠamong 
them a syringe, a vial of dark liquid . . . 

and a large knife with a bone handle and a blade hewn of iron burnished to an unusually high shine. 
 My God . . . what is he planning to do to me?   
 
 CHAPTER 105   
 
When CIA systems security specialist 
Rick Parrish finally loped into Nola Kaye™s office, he was carrying a single sheet of paper. 
 
ﬁWhat took you so long?!ﬂ Nola demanded. 
I told you to come down immediately!
  
ﬁSorry,ﬂ he said, pushing up his bottle-bottom glasses on his long nose. ﬁI was trying to 
gather more information for you, butŠﬂ 

 
ﬁJust show me what you™ve got.ﬂ 

 
Parrish handed her the printout. ﬁIt™s a redaction, but you get the gist.ﬂ  
Nola scanned the page in amazement. 

 
ﬁI™m still trying to figure out how a hacker got 
access,ﬂ Parrish said, ﬁbut it looks like a 

delegator spider hijacked
 one of our searchŠﬂ  
ﬁForget that!ﬂ Nola blurted, glancing up from th
e page. ﬁWhat the hell is the CIA doing 
with a classified file about pyramids, ancient portals, and engraved symbolons?ﬂ 

 
ﬁThat™s what took me so 
long. I was trying to see what document was being targeted, so I 
traced the file path.ﬂ Parrish paused, clearing his throat. ﬁThis document turns out to be 
on a partition personally assigned to . . . the CIA director himself.ﬂ  Nola wheeled, staring in disbelief. Sato™s boss has a file about the Masonic Pyramid? She knew that the current director, along with many other top CIA executives, was a 
high-ranking Mason, but Nola could not imagin
e any of them keeping Masonic secrets on a CIA computer. 
 
Then again, considering what she had witnessed in the last twenty-four hours, anything was possible. 
 
Agent Simkins was lying on his stomach, ensconced in the bushes of Franklin Square. 

His eyes were trained on the columned entry of the Almas Temple. 
Nothing. No lights had come on inside, and no one had approached
 the door. He turned his head and checked on Bellamy. The man was pacing alone in 
the middle of the park, looking cold. 
Really cold. Simkins could see him shaking and shivering. 

 
His phone vibrated. It was Sato. 
 
ﬁHow overdue is our target?ﬂ she demanded. 

 
Simkins checked his chronograph. ﬁTarget said 
twenty minutes. It™s been almost forty. 
Something™s wrong.ﬂ 

 
ﬁHe™s not coming,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁIt™s over.ﬂ 

 
Simkins knew she was right. ﬁAny word from Hartmann?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo, he never checked in from Kalorama Heights. I can™t reach him.ﬂ 
 Simkins stiffened. If this was true, then something was 
definitely
 wrong.  
ﬁI just called field support,ﬂ Sato said, ﬁand they can™t find him either.ﬂ  
Holy shit. ﬁDo they have a GPS location on the Escalade?ﬂ  
ﬁYeah. A residential address in Kalorama He
ights,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁGather your men. We™re 
pulling out.ﬂ 
 
Sato clicked off her phone and gazed out at the majestic skyline of her nation™s capital. 
An icy wind whipped through her light jacket, and she wrapped her arms around herself 
to stay warm. Director Inoue Sato was not a woman who often fe
lt cold . . . or fear. At the moment, however, she was feeling both. 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 106    
Mal™akh wore
 only his silk loincloth as he dashed up the ramp, through the steel door, and out through the painting into his living room. 
I need to prepare quickly. He glanced over at the dead CIA agent in the foyer. 
This home is no longer safe.
  
Carrying the stone pyramid in one hand, Mal™akh 
strode directly to his first-floor study and sat down at his laptop computer. As he
 logged in, he pictured Langdon downstairs and wondered how many days or even week
s would pass before the submerged corpse 
was discovered in the secret basement. It 
made no difference. Mal™akh would be long 
gone by then. 
 Langdon has served his role . . . brilliantly.  Not only had Langdon reunited the pieces of the Masonic Pyramid, he had figured out 
how to solve the arcane grid of symbols on th
e base. At first glance, the symbols seemed 
indecipherable . . . and yet the answer was simple . . . staring them in the face. 
 
Mal™akh™s laptop sprang to life, the screen displaying the same e-mail he had received 
earlierŠa photograph of a glowing capstone, partially blocked by Warren Bellamy™s 
finger. The  secret hides 
 within The Order. Franklin Square.  
 
Eight . . . Franklin Square, Katherine had told Mal™akh. She had also admitted that CIA 

agents were staking out Franklin Square, hoping to capture Mal™akh and also figure out what order was being referenced by the capstone. The Masons? The Shriners? The 
Rosicrucians? 

 
None of these, Mal™akh now knew. Langdon saw the truth.  
Ten minutes earlier, with liquid rising around 
his face, the Harvard professor had figured 

out the key to solving the pyramid. ﬁThe Orde
r Eight Franklin Square!ﬂ he had shouted, 
terror in his eyes. ﬁThe secret hides within The Order Eight Franklin Square!ﬂ  
At first, Mal™akh failed to understand his meaning. 

 
ﬁIt™s not an address!ﬂ Langdon yelled, his mout
h pressed to the Plexiglas window. ﬁThe Order Eight Franklin Square! It™s a magic square!ﬂ Then he said something about 
Albrecht Dürer . . . and how the pyramid™s first 
code was a clue to breaking this final one.  
Mal™akh was familiar with magic squaresŠ
kameas, as the early mystics called them. The 
ancient text 
De Occulta Philosophia described in detail the mystical power of magic 
squares and the methods for designing power
ful sigils based on magical grids of 

numbers. Now Langdon was telling him that a ma
gic square held the key to deciphering the base of the pyramid? 

 
ﬁYou need an eight-by-eight magic square!ﬂ 
the professor had been yelling, his lips the only part of his body above the liquid. ﬁMagic squares are categorized in orders! A three-
by-three square is an ‚order th
ree™! A four-by-four square is 
an ‚order four™! You need an 
‚order eight™!ﬂ 

 
The liquid had been about to engulf Langdon entirely, and the professor drew one last desperate breath and shouted out something 
about a famous Mason . . . an American 
forefather . . . a scientist, mystic, mathematician, inventor . . . as well as the creator of the 

mystical kamea
 that bore his name to this day. 
 Franklin.  In a flash, Mal™akh knew Langdon was right. 
 
Now, breathless with anticipation, Mal™akh sat upstairs at his laptop. He ran a quick Web search, received dozens of hits, chose one, and began reading.  
 THE ORDER EIGHT FRANKLIN SQUARE
   One of history™s best-known magic squares is
 the order-eight square published in 1769 by American scientist Benjamin Franklin, and 
which became famous for its inclusion of 
never-before-seen ﬁbent diagonal summations.ﬂ Franklin™s obsession with this mystical 
art form most likely stemme
d from his personal associations with the prominent 
alchemists and mystics of his day, as well as
 his own belief in astrology, which were the underpinnings for the predictions made in his 
Poor Richard™s Almanack.   
    
Mal™akh studied Franklin™s famous creati
onŠa unique arrangement of the numbers 1 

through 64Šin which every row, column, a
nd diagonal added up to the same magical 
constant. The secret hides within The Order Eight Franklin Square.  
Mal™akh smiled. Trembling with excitement, he
 grabbed the stone pyramid and flipped it 

over, examining the base. 
   
These sixty-four symbols needed 
to be reorganized and arranged in a different order, their sequence defined by the numbers in Frank
lin™s magic square. Although Mal™akh could 
not imagine how this chaotic grid of symbol
s would suddenly make sense in a different 
order, he had faith in the ancient promise. 

 Ordo ab chao.  Heart racing, he took out a sheet of paper and quickly drew an empt
y eight-by-eight grid. Then he began inserting the symbols, one by one, in their newly defined positions. 

Almost immediately, to his astonish
ment, the grid began making sense. 
 Order from chaos!  He completed the entire decrypt
ion and stared in disbelief at the solution before him. A 
stark image had taken shape. The jumbled grid 
had been transformed . . . reorganized . . . 
and although Mal™akh could not grasp the meaning of the 
entire message, he understood 
enough . . . enough to know exactly where he was now headed. 
 The pyramid points the way.  The grid pointed to one of the world™s great mystical locations. Incredibly, it was the 
same location at which Mal™akh had always 
fantasized he would complete his journey. 
 Destiny.   
 
 CHAPTER 107   
 
The stone table felt cold beneath Katherine Solomon™s back.  
Horrifying images of Robert™s death con
tinued to swirl through her mind, along with 
thoughts of her brother. Is Peter dead, too? The strange knife on the nearby table kept bringing flashes of what might 
lie in store for her as well
.  Is this really the end?  Oddly, her thoughts turned abruptly to her research . . . to Noetic Science . . . and to her recent breakthroughs. 
All of it lost . . . up in smoke. She would never be able to share with the world everything she had learned. Her mo
st shocking discovery had taken place only 
a few months ago, and the results had the pot
ential to redefine the way humans thought 
about death. Strangely, thinking now of that experiment . . . was bringing her an 
unexpected solace. 
 
As a young girl, Katherine Solomon had often 
wondered if there was life after death. Does heaven exist? What happens when we die? As she grew older, her studies in science quickly erased any fanciful notions of heaven, hell, or the afterlife.
 The concept of ﬁlife 
after death,ﬂ she came to accept, was a human cons
truct . . . a fairy tale designed to soften 
the horrifying truth that was our mortality. 

 Or so I believed . . .  A year ago, Katherine and her brother had been discussing one of philosophy™s most 
enduring questionsŠthe existence of the human
 soulŠspecifically the issue of whether or not humans possessed some kind of 
consciousness capable of survival outside of the body. 
 
They both sensed that such a human soul probably 
did exist. Most ancient philosophies 
concurred. Buddhist and Brahminical wi
sdom endorsed metempsychosisŠthe 
transmigration of the soul into a new body af
ter death; Platonists defined the body as a 
ﬁprisonﬂ from which the soul escaped; and the Stoics called the soul 
apospasma tou theuŠﬁa particle of GodﬂŠand believed it was recalled by God upon death.  
The existence of the human soul, Katherine noted with some  
frustration, was probably a concept that would never be scientifically proven. Confirming 
that a consciousness survived outside the human body after death was akin to exhaling a puff of smoke and hoping to find it years later. 
 
After their discussion, Katherine had a strange notion. Her brother had mentioned the 
Book of Genesis and its desc
ription of the soul as NeshemahŠa kind of spiritual ﬁintelligenceﬂ that was separate from the body. It occurred 
to Katherine that the word intelligence
 suggested the presence of thought. Noetic Science clearly suggested that 
thoughts had mass, and so it stood to reason, the
n, that the human soul might therefore 
also have mass. 

 Can I weigh a human soul?  The notion was impossible, of course . . . foolish even to ponder. 

 
It was three days later that Katherine suddenly woke up from a dead sleep and sat bolt upright in bed. She jumped up, drove to her 
lab, and immediately began work designing 
an experiment that was both startli
ngly simple . . . and frighteningly bold. 
 
She had no idea if it would work, and she decided not to tell Peter about
 her idea until her work was complete. It took four months, but
 finally Katherine brought her brother into the lab. She wheeled out a large piece of gear
 that she had been keeping hidden in the back storage room. 

 
ﬁI designed and built it myself,ﬂ she said, showing Peter her invention. ﬁAny guesses?ﬂ 

 
Her brother stared at the strange machine. ﬁAn incubator?ﬂ 
 
Katherine laughed and shook her head, although it was a reasonable guess. The machine 
did look a bit like the transparent incubators for premature babies one saw in hospitals. 
This machine, however, was adult sizeŠa long, 
airtight, clear plastic capsule, like some 
kind of futuristic sleeping pod. It sat 
atop a large piece of electronic gear. 
 
ﬁSee if this helps you guess,ﬂ Katherine said, plugging the contraption into a power source. A digital display lit up on the machine, its numbers jumping around as she 

carefully calibrated some dials. 
 
When she was done, the display read: 0.0000000000 kg  
 
ﬁA scale?ﬂ Peter asked, looking puzzled. 
 
ﬁNot just any scale.ﬂ Katherine took a tiny scrap of paper off a nearby counter and laid it gently on top of the capsule. The numbers on the display jumped around again and then settled on a new reading.  
 .0008194325 kg  
 
ﬁHigh-precision microbalance,ﬂ she said. 
ﬁResolution down to a few micrograms.ﬂ 
 
Peter still looked puzzled. ﬁYou built a precise scale for . . . a person?ﬂ  
ﬁExactly.ﬂ She lifted the transparent lid on th
e machine. ﬁIf I place a person inside this 
capsule and close the lid, the 
individual is in an entirely 
sealed
 system. Nothing gets in or 
out. No gas, no liquid, no dust particles. Nothing can escapeŠnot the person™s breath exhalations, evaporating sweat, body fluids, nothing.ﬂ 
 
Peter ran a hand through his thick head of silver hair, a nervous mannerism shared by 
Katherine. ﬁHmm . . . obviously a person would die in there pretty quickly.ﬂ  
She nodded. ﬁSix minutes or so, de
pending on their breathing rate.ﬂ 
 
He turned to her. ﬁI don™t get it.ﬂ 
 
She smiled. ﬁYou 
will.ﬂ  
Leaving the machine behind, Katherine led Pete
r into the Cube™s control room and sat 
him down in front of the plasma wall. She 
began typing and accessed a series of video files stored on the holographic drives. When th
e plasma wall flickered to life, the image 
before them looked like
 home-video footage. 
 
The camera panned across a modest bedroom 
with an unmade bed, medication bottles, a 
respirator, and a heart monitor. Peter looked baffled as the camera kept panning and 
finally revealed, near the center of the bedroom, Katherine™s scale contraption. 
 
Peter™s eyes widened. ﬁWhat the . . . ?ﬂ 

 
The capsule™s transparent lid was open, and a very old man in an oxygen mask lay inside. 
His elderly wife and a hospice worker stood beside the pod. The man™s breathing was 

labored, and his eyes were closed. 
 
ﬁThe man in the capsule was a science teacher 
of mine at Yale,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁHe and 

I have kept in touch over the years. He™s been very ill. He always said he wanted to 

donate his body to science, so when I explained my idea for this experiment, he 
immediately wanted to be a part of it.ﬂ 

 Peter was apparently mute with shock as he
 stared at the scene unfolding before them. 
 The hospice worker now turned to the man™s wife. ﬁIt™s time. He™s ready.ﬂ 
 
The old woman dabbed her tearful eyes and nodded with a resolute calm. ﬁOkay.ﬂ 

 
Very gently, the hospice worker reached into the pod and removed the  
man™s oxygen mask. The man stirred slightl
y, but his eyes remained closed. Now the 
worker wheeled the respirator and other equipment off to the side, leaving the old man in 
the capsule totally isolated in the center of the room. 

 
The dying man™s wife now approached the pod, leaned down, and gently kissed her 
husband™s forehead. The old man did not ope
n his eyes, but his lips moved, ever so 
slightly, into a faint, loving smile. 

 
Without his oxygen mask, the man™s breathing 
was quickly becoming 
more labored. The 
end was obviously near. With an admirable 
strength and calm, the man™s wife slowly 
lowered the transparent lid of the capsule a
nd sealed it shut, exactly as Katherine had 
taught her. 
 
Peter recoiled in alarm. ﬁKatheri
ne, what in the name of God?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s okay,ﬂ Katherine whispered. ﬁThere™s plenty
 of air in the capsule.ﬂ She had seen this video dozens of times now, but it still made
 her pulse race. She pointed to the scale 
beneath the dying man™s sealed 
pod. The digital numbers read: 
51.4534644 kg  
 
ﬁThat™s his body weight,ﬂ Katherine said. 
 
The old man™s breathing became more shallo
w, and Peter inched forward, transfixed. 
 
ﬁThis is what he wanted,ﬂ Katherine whispered. ﬁWatch what happens.ﬂ  
The man™s wife had stepped back and was 
now seated on the bed, silently looking on with the hospice worker. 
 
Over the course of the next sixty seconds, the man™s shallow breathing grew faster, until 

all at once, as if the man himself had chosen
 the moment, he simply took his last breath. 
Everything stopped. 
 
It was over. 
 
The wife and hospice worker quietly comforted each other. 
 Nothing else happened. 
 
After a few seconds, Peter glanced over at Katherine in apparent confusion.  
Wait for it, she thought, redirecting Peter™s gaze to
 the capsule™s digital display, which still quietly glowed, showing the dead man™s weight. 

 
Then it happened. 
 
When Peter saw it, he jolted backward, almost 
falling out of his chair. ﬁBut . . . that™s . . .ﬂ He covered his mouth in shock. ﬁI can™t . . .ﬂ 

 
It was seldom that the great Peter Solomon 
was speechless. Katherine™s reaction had been 
similar the first few times she saw what had happened. 

 
Moments after the man™s death, the number
s on the scale had decreased suddenly. The 
man had become 
lighter immediately after his death. Th
e weight change was minuscule, 
but it was measurable . . . and the im
plications were utterly mind-boggling. 
 
Katherine recalled writing in he
r lab notes with a trembling 
hand: ﬁThere seems to exist 
an invisible ‚material™ that exits the 
human body at the moment of death. It has 
quantifiable mass which is unimpeded by physical
 barriers. I must assume it moves in a 
dimension I cannot yet perceive.ﬂ 

 
From the expression of shock on her brothe
r™s face, Katherine knew he understood the implications. ﬁKatherine . . .ﬂ he stammered, bl
inking his gray eyes as if to make sure he 
was not dreaming. ﬁI think you ju
st weighed the human soul.ﬂ 
 There was a long silence between them. 
 
Katherine sensed that her brother was attempting to process all the stark and wondrous 

ramifications. 
It will take time.
 If what they had just witnessed was indeed what it seemed 
to beŠthat is, evidence that a soul or consciousness or life force could move outside the realm of the bodyŠthen a startling new light 
had just been shed on countless mystical 
questions: transmigration, cosmic consci
ousness, near-death experiences, astral 
projection, remote viewing, lucid dreaming, a
nd on and on. Medical journals were filled with stories of patients who had died on the operating table, viewed their bodies from above, and then been brought back to life. 
 
Peter was silent, and Katherine now saw he had tears in his eyes. She understood. She had cried, too. Peter and Katherine had lost loved ones, and for anyone in that position, the faintest hint of the human spirit continuing after death brought a glimmer of hope. 
 
He™s thinking of Zachary, Katherine thought, recognizing the deep melancholy in her 
brother™s eyes. For years Peter had carried the burden of responsibility for his son™s 
death. He had told Katherine many times that leaving Zachary in prison had been the 
worst mistake of his life, and that he would never find a way to forgive himself. 

 
A slamming door drew Kath
erine™s attention, and suddenly she was back in the basement, lying on a cold stone table. The me
tal door at the top of the ramp had closed loudly, and the tattooed man was coming back 
down. She could hear him entering one of the rooms down the hall, doing something in
side, and then continuing along the hall toward the room she was in. As he entered, 
she could see that he was pushing something 
in front of him. Something heavy . . . on wheel
s. As he stepped into the light, she stared 
in disbelief. The tattooed man wa
s pushing a person in a wheelchair.  
Intellectually, Katherine™s brai
n recognized the man in the 
chair. Emotionally, her mind 
could barely accept what she was looking at. 

 Peter?  She didn™t know whether to be overjoyed that her brother was alive . . . or utterly horrified. Peter™s body had been shaved smooth.
 His mane of thick silver hair was all 
gone, as were his eyebrows, and his smooth skin glistened as if it had been oiled. He wore a black silk gown. Where his right hand should have been, he had only a stump, 
wrapped in a clean, fresh bandage. Her brother™s pain-laden eyes reached out to hers, filled with regret and sorrow. 

 
ﬁPeter!ﬂ Her voice cracked. 

 
Her brother tried to speak but made only muffl
ed, guttural noises. Katherine now realized 
he was bound to the wheelchair and had been gagged. 
 
The tattooed man reached down and gently stroked Peter™s shaved scalp. ﬁI™ve prepared 

your brother for a great honor. He has a role to play tonight.ﬂ  
Katherine™s entire body went rigid. No . . .  
ﬁPeter and I will be leaving in a moment
, but I thought you™d want to say good-bye.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWhere are you taking him?ﬂ she said weakly. 

 
He smiled. ﬁPeter and I must journey to the 
sacred mountain. That 
is where the treasure lies. The Masonic Pyramid has revealed 
the location. Your friend Robert Langdon was most helpful.ﬂ 
 
Katherine looked into he
r brother™s eyes. ﬁHe killed . . . Robert.ﬂ  
Her brother™s expression contorted in agony, and he shook his head violently, as if unable to bear any more pain. 
 ﬁNow, now, Peter,ﬂ the man sai
d, again stroking Peter™s scalp. ﬁDon™t let this ruin the 
moment. Say good-bye to your 
little sister. This is your final family reunion.ﬂ 
 Katherine felt her mind welling 
with desperation. ﬁWhy are 
you doing this?!ﬂ she shouted at him. ﬁWhat have we ever done to you?
! Why do you hate my family so much?!ﬂ 
 
The tattooed man came over and placed his m
outh right next to her ear. ﬁI have my 
reasons, Katherine.ﬂ Then he walked to the si
de table and picked up the strange knife. He 
brought it over to her and ran the burnished blade across her cheek. ﬁThis is arguably the most famous knife in history.ﬂ 

 
Katherine knew of no famous knives, but it 
looked foreboding and ancient. The blade felt razor sharp. 

 
ﬁDon™t worry,ﬂ he said. ﬁI have no intention of wasting its power on you.  
I™m saving it for a more worthy sacrifice . . . 
in a more sacred place.ﬂ He turned to her brother. ﬁPeter, you recognize this knife, don™t you?ﬂ 
 
Her brother™s eyes were wide with a mixture of fear and disbelief. 
 
ﬁYes, Peter, this ancient artif
act still exists. I obtained it at great expense . . . and I have been saving it for you. At long last, you and I can end our painful journey together.ﬂ  
With that, he wrapped the knife carefully in 
a cloth with all of his other itemsŠincense, 
vials of liquid, white satin cloths, and other ceremonial objects. He then placed the 
wrapped items inside Robert Langdon™s leat
her bag along with the Masonic Pyramid and 
capstone. Katherine looked on helplessly 
as the man zipped up Langdon™s daybag and 
turned to her brother. 
 
ﬁCarry this, Peter, would you?ﬂ He
 set the heavy bag on Peter™s lap.  
Next, the man walked over to a drawer and began rooting around. She could hear small 

metal objects clinking. When he returned, he 
took her right arm, st
eadying it. Katherine couldn™t see what he was doing, but Peter appa
rently could, and he again started bucking 
wildly. 
 
Katherine felt a sudden, sharp pinch in the crook of her right elbow, and an eerie warmth 
ran down around it. Peter was making anguished
, strangled sounds and trying in vain to get out of the heavy chair. Katherine felt a cold numbness spreading through her forearm 
and fingertips below the elbow. 
 
When the man stepped aside, Katherine saw why her brother was so horrified. The tattooed man had inserted a medical needle in
to her vein, as if she were giving blood. The needle, however, was not attached to a tube
. Instead, her blood was now flowing freely out of it . . . running down her elbow, forearm, and onto the stone table. 
 ﬁA human hourglass,ﬂ the man said, turning to 
Peter. ﬁIn a short while, when I ask you to play your role, I want you to picture Katherine . . . dying alone here in the dark.ﬂ  
Peter™s expression was one of total torment. 

 
ﬁShe will stay alive,ﬂ the man said, ﬁfor a
bout an hour or so. If you cooperate with me 
quickly, I will have enough time to save her. Of
 course, if you resist me at all . . . your 
sister will die here alone in the dark.ﬂ  
Peter bellowed unintelligibly through his gag. 

 
ﬁI know, I know,ﬂ the tattooed man said, placi
ng a hand on Peter™s shoulder, ﬁthis is hard for you. But it shouldn™t be. After all, this 
is not the first time you will abandon a family 
member.ﬂ He paused, bending over and whispe
ring in Peter™s ear. ﬁI™m thinking, of 
course, of your son, Zachary, in Soganlik prison.ﬂ 
 
Peter pulled against his restraints and let out another mu
ffled scream through the cloth in 
his mouth. 

 
ﬁStop it!ﬂ Katherine shouted. 

 
ﬁI remember that night well,ﬂ the man taunted 
as he finished packing. ﬁI heard the whole thing. The warden offered to let your son go, 
but you chose to teach Zachary a lesson . . . 
by abandoning him. Your boy learned his less
on, all right, didn™t he?ﬂ The man smiled. 
ﬁHis loss . . . was my gain.ﬂ 
 The man now retrieved a linen 
cloth and stuffed it deep into Katherine™s mouth. ﬁDeath,ﬂ he whispered to her, ﬁshould be a quiet thing.ﬂ 
 
Peter struggled violently. Wit
hout another word, the tattooed man slowly backed Peter™s 
wheelchair out of the room, giving Pete
r a long, last look at his sister.  
Katherine and Peter locked eyes one final time. 

 
Then he was gone. 
 
Katherine could hear them goi
ng up the ramp and through the metal door. As they exited, 
she heard the tattooed man lock the metal door behind him 
and continue on through the painting of the Three Graces. A few minutes later, she heard a car start. 

 
Then the mansion fell silent. 

 
All alone in the dark, Katherine lay bleeding. 
 
   CHAPTER 108   
 
Robert Langdon™s mind hovered in an endless abyss. 
 
No light. No sound. No feeling. 
 Only an infinite and silent void.  
Softness. 
 
Weightlessness. 

 
His body had released him. He was untethered. 
 
The physical world had ceased to exist. Time had ceased to exist. 

 
He was pure consciousness now . . . a fleshless sentience suspended in the emptiness of a 

vast universe. 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 109   
 
The modified UH-60 skimmed in low over the expansiv
e rooftops of Kalorama Heights, 
thundering toward the coordinates given to them by the support team. Agent Simkins was 
the first to spot the black Escalade parked 
haphazardly on a lawn in front of one of the mansions. The driveway gate was clos
ed, and the house was dark and quiet. 
 
Sato gave the signal to touch down.  
 
The aircraft landed hard on the front lawn amid several other 
vehicles . . . one of them a 
security sedan with a bubble light on top. 
 
Simkins and his team jumped out, drew th
eir weapons, and dashed up onto the porch. Finding the front door locked, Simkins cuppe
d his hands and peered through a window. The foyer was dark, but Simkins could make out
 the faint shadow of a body on the floor.  ﬁShit,ﬂ he whispered. ﬁIt™s Hartmann.ﬂ 

 
One of his agents grabbed a chair off the porch and heaved it through the bay window. The sound of shattering glass was barely audible over the roar of the helicopter behind them. Seconds later, they were all inside
. Simkins rushed to the foyer and knelt over 
Hartmann to check his pulse. Nothing. There was blood everywhere. Then he saw the 

screwdriver in Hartmann™s throat. 

 
Jesus. He stood up and motioned to his men to begin a full search. 
 
The agents fanned out across the first floor, their laser sights probing the darkness of the 

luxurious house. They found nothing in the living room or study, but 
in the dining room, 
to their surprise, they disc
overed a strangled female secu
rity guard. Simkins was fast 
losing hope that Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon were 
alive. This brutal killer clearly had set a trap, and if he had managed to kill a CIA agent and an armed security 

guard, then it seemed a professor and a scientist had no chance. 

 
Once the first floor was secure, Simkins sent 
two agents to search upstairs. Meanwhile, 
he found a set of basement stairs off the 
kitchen and descended. At the bottom of the 
stairs, he threw on the lights. The basement wa
s spacious and spotless, as if it were hardly ever used. Boilers, bare cement walls, a few boxes. 
Nothing here at all. Simkins headed 
back up to the kitchen just as his men were coming down from the second floor. 

Everyone shook their heads. 
 
The house was deserted.  No one home. And no more bodies. 
 
Simkins radioed Sato with the all-clear and the grim update. 

 
When he got to the foyer, Sato was already climbing the stairs onto the porch. Warren 

Bellamy was visible behind her, sitting dazed 
and alone in the helicopter with Sato™s 
titanium briefcase at his feet. The OS dire
ctor™s secure laptop provided her with worldwide access to CIA computer systems via encrypted satellite uplinks. Earlier 

tonight, she had used this computer to share 
with Bellamy some kind of information that 

had stunned the man into cooperating fully. Simkins had no idea what Bellamy had seen, 

but whatever it was, the Architect had been visibly shell-shocked ever since.  
As Sato entered the foyer, she paused a moment, bowing her head over Hartmann™s body. 
A moment later, she raised her eyes and fi
xed them on Simkins. ﬁNo sign of Langdon or 
Katherine? Or Peter Solomon?ﬂ 

 
Simkins shook his head. ﬁIf they™re st
ill alive, he took them with him.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDid you see a computer in the house?ﬂ 
 ﬁYes, ma™am. In the office.ﬂ 

 
ﬁShow me.ﬂ 

 
Simkins led Sato out of the foyer and into 
the living room. The plus
h carpet was covered with broken glass from the shattered bay wi
ndow. They walked past a fireplace, a large painting, and several bookshelves to an office door. The office was wood paneled, with an antique desk and a large computer monito
r. Sato walked around behind the desk and eyed the screen, immediately scowling. 

 
ﬁDamn it,ﬂ she said under her breath. 

 
Simkins circled around and looked at the 
screen. It was blank. ﬁWhat™s wrong?ﬂ 
 
Sato pointed to an empty docking station on th
e desk. ﬁHe uses a laptop. He took it with him.ﬂ 

 
Simkins didn™t follow. ﬁDoes he have information you want to see?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Sato replied, her tone grave. ﬁHe has information I want 
nobody to see.ﬂ 
 
Downstairs in the hidden basement, Kath
erine Solomon had h
eard the sounds of helicopter blades followed by breaking glass and heavy boots on the floor above her. She 
tried to cry out for help, but the gag in her mouth made it impossible. She could barely 
make a sound. The harder she tried, the fast
er the blood began flowing from her elbow. 
 
She was feeling short of breath and a little dizzy.  
Katherine knew she needed to calm down. 
Use your mind, Katherine. With all of her 
intention, she coaxed herself into a meditative state. 
 
Robert Langdon™s mind floated through the em
ptiness of space. He peered into the infinite void, searching for any points of reference. He found nothing. 
 
Total darkness. Total silence. Total peace. 

 
There was not even the pull of gravity to tell him which way was up. 

 
His body was gone. 
 This must be death.  Time seemed to be telescoping, stretching a
nd compressing, as if it had no bearings in this place. He had lost all track of how much time had passed. 

 Ten seconds? Ten minutes? Ten days?  Suddenly, however, like distant fiery explosions in far-off galaxies, memories began to 
materialize, billowing toward Langdon like 
shock waves across a vast nothingness. 

 
All at once, Robert Langdon began to remember
. The images tore through him . . . vivid 
and disturbing. He was staring up at a face th
at was covered with tattoos. A pair of 
powerful hands lifted his head and smashed it into the floor. 

 
Pain erupted . . . and then darkness. 
 
Gray light. 

 
Throbbing. 
 
Wisps of memory. Langdon was being dragge
d, half conscious, down, down, down. His captor was chanting something. 

 Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . . Verbum perdo . . .   
 
 CHAPTER 110   
 
Director Sato
 stood alone in the study, waiting while
 the CIA satellite-imaging division 

processed her request. One of the luxuries of working in the D.C. area was the satellite coverage. With luck, one of them might have been properly positioned to get photos of 

this home tonight . . . possibly capturing a ve
hicle leaving the place in the last half hour. 
 
ﬁSorry, ma™am,ﬂ the satellite technician sai
d. ﬁNo coverage of those coordinates tonight. Do you want to make a reposition request?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo thanks. Too late.ﬂ She hung up. 

 
Sato exhaled, now having no idea how they would figure out where their target had gone. 
She walked out to the foyer, where her men had bagged Agent Hartmann™s body and 

were carrying it toward the chopper. Sato had ordered Agent Simkins to gather his men 

and prepare for the return to Langley, but Simkins was in the living room on his hands 
and knees. He looked like he was ill. 
 
ﬁYou okay?ﬂ 
 He glanced up, an odd look on his face. ﬁDid you see this?ﬂ He pointed at the living-
room floor. 
 
Sato came over and looked down at the plush 
carpet. She shook her head, seeing nothing.  
ﬁCrouch down,ﬂ Simkins said. ﬁLoo
k at the nap of the carpet.ﬂ  
She did. After a moment, she saw it. The fibe
rs of the carpet looked like they had been mashed down . . . depressed along two straight 
lines as if the wheels of something heavy 
had been rolled across the room. 

 
ﬁThe strange thing,ﬂ Simkins said, ﬁis wher
e the tracks go.ﬂ He pointed.  
Sato™s gaze followed the faint parallel lines across the living-room carpet. The tracks 

seemed to disappear beneath a large fl
oor-to-ceiling painting that hung beside the fireplace. What in the world?  
Simkins walked over to the painting and trie
d to lift it down from the wall. It didn™t 

budge. ﬁIt™s fixed,ﬂ he said, now running his fingers around the edges. ﬁHold on, there™s 
something underneath . . .ﬂ His finger hit a small lever beneath the bottom edge, and 

something clicked. 

 
Sato stepped forward as Simkins pushed the fr
ame and the entire pa
inting rotated slowly 
on its center, like a revolving door. 
 
He raised his flashlight and shined it into the dark space beyond. 
 Sato™s eyes narrowed. Here we go.  
At the end of a short corridor stood a heavy metal door. 

 
The memories that had billowed through the blackness of Langdon™s mind had come and 

gone. In their wake, a trail of red-hot sparks was swirling, along with the same eerie, 
distant whisper. 
 Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . . Verbum perdo.  The chanting continued like the drone of voices in a medieval canticle.  
 
Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum. The words now tumbled through the empty 
void, fresh voices echoing all around him. 

 Apocalypsis . . . Franklin . . . Apocalypsis . . . Verbum . . . Apocalypsis . . .  Without warning, a mournful bell began tolli
ng somewhere in the distance. The bell rang 
on and on, growing louder. It tolled more urgently now, as if hoping Langdon would understand, as if urging his mind to follow. 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 111   
 
The tolling bell in the clock tower rang for three full minutes, rattling the crystal 
chandelier that hung above Langdon™s head. Decades ago, he had attended lectures in this 
well-loved assembly hall at Phillips Exeter
 Academy. Today, however, he was here to 
listen to a dear friend address the student body. As the lights dimmed, Langdon took a 
seat against the back wall, beneath a pantheon of headmaster portraits. 
 
A hush fell across the crowd. 
 
In total darkness, a tall, shadowy figure crossed the stage and took the podium. ﬁGood 
morning,ﬂ the faceless voice whispered into the microphone. 

 
Everyone sat up, straining to see who was addressing them. 

 
A slide projector flashed to life, revealing a faded sepia photographŠa dramatic castle 
with a red sandstone facade, high square towers, and Gothic embellishments. 

 
The shadow spoke again. ﬁWho can tell me where this is?ﬂ 

 
ﬁEngland!ﬂ a girl declared in the darkness. 
ﬁThis facade is a blend of early Gothic and 
late Romanesque, making this the quintessential 
Norman castle and placing it in England at about the twelfth century.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWow,ﬂ the faceless voice replied. ﬁSomeone knows her architecture.ﬂ 

 
Quiet groans all around. 
 
ﬁUnfortunately,ﬂ the shadow added, ﬁyou missed by three thousand miles and half a 
millennium.ﬂ 

 
The room perked up. 

 
The projector now flashed a full-color, modern photo of the same castle from a different 
angle. The castle™s Seneca Creek sandstone towers dominated the foreground, but in the 
background, startlingly close, stood the maje
stic, white, columned dome of the U.S. 
Capitol Building. 
 ﬁHold on!ﬂ the girl exclaimed. ﬁThere™s a Norman castle in D.C.?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁSince 1855,ﬂ the voice replied. ﬁWhich is when this next photo was taken.ﬂ  
A new slide appearedŠa black-and-white inte
rior shot, depicting a massive vaulted 
ballroom, furnished with animal skeletons, 
scientific display cas
es, glass jars with biological samples, archaeological artifacts, and plaster casts of prehistoric reptiles. 

 
ﬁThis wondrous castle,ﬂ the voice said, ﬁwas America™s first real science museum. It was 
a gift to America from a wealthy British sc
ientist who, like our forefathers, believed our fledgling country could become the land 
of enlightenment. He bequeathed to our 
forefathers a massive fortune and asked them
 to build at the core of our nation ‚an establishment for the increase and diffusion of
 knowledge.™ ﬂ He paused a long moment. 
ﬁWho can tell me the name of 
this generous scientist?ﬂ  
A timid voice in front ventured, ﬁJames 
Smithson?ﬂ  
A whisper of recognition rippled through the crowd. 
 
ﬁSmithson indeed,ﬂ the man on stage replied. 
Peter Solomon now ste
pped into the light, his gray eyes flashing playfully. ﬁGood morn
ing. My name is Peter Solomon, and I am 
secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.ﬂ  
The students broke into wild applause. 
 
In the shadows, Langdon watched with admi
ration as Peter captivated the young minds 
with a photographic tour of the Smithsonian 
Institution™s early history. The show began with Smithsonian Castle, its basement science 
labs, corridors lined with exhibits, a salon full of mollusks, scientists who called themselv
es ﬁthe curators of crustaceans,ﬂ and even an old photo of the castle™s two most popular
 residentsŠa pair of now-deceased owls named Diffusion and Increase. 
The half-hour slide show ended with an impressive 
satellite photo of the National Mall, now lin
ed with enormous Smithsonian museums. 
 
ﬁAs I said when I began,ﬂ Solomon stated
 in conclusion, ﬁJames Smithson and our 
forefathers envisioned our great country to be a land of enlightenment. I believe today 
they would be proud. Their great Smithsonian Institution stands as a symbol of science 

and knowledge at the very core of America. 
It is a living, breathing, working tribute to our forefathers™ dream for AmericaŠa count
ry founded on the principles of knowledge, wisdom, and science.ﬂ 

 
Solomon clicked off the slides to an ener
getic round of applause. The houselights came 
up, along with dozens of eager hands with questions. 
 
Solomon called on a small red-haired boy in the middle. 

 
ﬁMr. Solomon?ﬂ the boy said, sounding puzzled. ﬁYou said our forefathers fled the 
religious oppression of Europe to establish a country on the principles of scientific 
advancement.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThat™s correct.ﬂ 
 
ﬁBut . . . I was under the impression our fore
fathers were devoutly religious men who 
founded America as a Christian
 nation.ﬂ  
Solomon smiled. ﬁMy friends, don™t get me wron
g, our forefathers were deeply religious 
men, but they were DeistsŠmen who believed in God, but in a universal and open-

minded way. The only 
religious
 ideal they put forth was religious freedom.ﬂ He pulled the microphone from the podium and strode out to the edge of the stage. ﬁAmerica™s 

forefathers had a vision of a spiritually enlightened utopia, in which freedom of thought, 
education of the masses, and scientific 
advancement would replace the darkness of 
outdated religious superstition.ﬂ 
 
A blond girl in back raised her hand. 
 
ﬁYes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁSir,ﬂ the girl said, holding up her cell phone, ﬁI™ve been researching you online, and Wikipedia says you™re a prominent Freemason.ﬂ 

 
Solomon held up his Masonic ring. ﬁI could have saved you the data charges.ﬂ 

 
The students laughed.  ﬁYes, well,ﬂ the girl continued, hesitating, ﬁyou just mentioned ‚outdated religious 
superstition,™ and it seems to me that if 
anyone is responsible for propagating outdated superstitions . . . it would be the Masons.ﬂ 
 
Solomon seemed unfazed. ﬁOh? How so?ﬂ 

 
ﬁWell, I™ve read a lot abou
t Masonry, and I know you™ve got a lot of strange ancient rituals and beliefs. This article online even says
 that Masons believe in the power of some 
kind of ancient magical wisdom . . . which 
can elevate man to the realm of the gods?ﬂ 
 
Everyone turned and stared at the girl as if she were nuts. 
 
ﬁActually,ﬂ Solomon said, ﬁshe™s right.ﬂ 

 
The kids all spun around and faced front, eyes widening. 

 
Solomon suppressed a smile and asked the girl, ﬁDoes it offer any other Wiki-wisdom 

about this magical knowledge?ﬂ 

 The girl looked uneasy now, but she began to read from the Web site. ﬁ‚To ensure this 
powerful wisdom could not be used by the 
unworthy, the early adepts wrote down their knowledge in code . . . cloaking its potent truth in a metaphorical language of symbols, 
myth, and allegory. To this day, this encrypted wisdom is all around us . . . encoded in 
our mythology, our art, and the occult texts 
of the ages. Unfortunately, modern man has 
lost the ability to decipher this complex netw
ork of symbolism . . . 
and the great truth has been lost.™ﬂ 
 
Solomon waited. ﬁThat™s all?ﬂ 

 
The girl shifted in her seat. ﬁActually, there 
is a little bit more.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI should hope so. Please . . . tell us.ﬂ 
 
The girl looked hesitant, but she cleared her throat and continued. ﬁ‚According to legend, the sages who encrypted the Ancien
t Mysteries long ago left behind a key of sorts . . . a password that could be used to unlock the encrypted secrets. This magical passwordŠ
known as the verbum significatium
Šis said to hold the power to lift the darkness and 
unlock the Ancient Mysteries, opening them to all human understanding.™ ﬂ 
 
Solomon smiled wistfully. ﬁAh, yes . . . the 
verbum significatium.
ﬂ He stared into space 
for a moment and then lowered his eyes ag
ain to the blond girl. ﬁAnd where is this 
wonderful word now?ﬂ 
 
The girl looked apprehensive, clearly wishing she had not challenged their guest speaker. She finished reading. ﬁ ‚Legend holds that the verbum significatium is buried deep underground, where it waits patiently for a pivotal moment in history . . . a moment when 

mankind can no longer survive without the trut
h, knowledge, and wisdom of the ages. At this dark crossroads, mankind will at last un
earth the Word and herald in a wondrous new 
age of enlightenment.™ ﬂ 

 
The girl turned off her phone and shrank down in her seat. 
 
After a long silence, another student raised his hand. ﬁMr. Solomon, you don™t actually 
believe
 that, right?ﬂ  
Solomon smiled. ﬁWhy not? Our mythologies have a long tradition of magic words that 

provide insight and godlike powers. To this day, children still shout ‚abracadabra™ in hopes of creating something out of nothing. Of course, we™ve all forgo
tten that this word 
is not a toy; it has roots in ancient Aramaic mysticismŠ
Avrah KaDabraŠmeaning ‚I 
create as I speak.™ ﬂ 

 
Silence. 
 
ﬁBut, sir,ﬂ the student now pressed, ﬁsurely you don™t believe that a single word . . . this verbum significatium . . . whatever it is . . . has the power to unlock ancient wisdom . . . 
and bring about a worldwide enlightenment?ﬂ 
 
Peter Solomon™s face revealed nothing. ﬁMy 
own beliefs should not concern you. What 
should concern you is that this prophecy of a coming enlightenment is echoed in virtually 
every faith and philosophical tradition on earth. Hindus call it the Krita Age, astrologers 
call it the Age of Aquarius, the Jews describe the coming of the Messiah, theosophists 
call it the New Age, cosmologists call it Harmonic Convergence and 
predict the actual date.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDecember 21, 2012!ﬂ someone called. 

 
ﬁYes, unnervingly soon . . . if you™re a believer in Mayan math.ﬂ 

 
Langdon chuckled, recalling how Solomon, ten years ago, had correctly predicted the 

current spate of television specials predicting that the year 2012 would mark the End of 
the World. 

 
ﬁTiming aside,ﬂ Solomon said, ﬁI find it w
ondrous to note that throughout history, all of mankind™s disparate philosophi
es have all concurred on one thingŠthat a great enlightenment is coming. In every culture, in ev
ery era, in every corner of the world, the human dream has focused on the same exact conceptŠthe coming apotheosis of man . . . 

the impending transformation of our human mind
s into their true potentiality.ﬂ He smiled. 
ﬁWhat could possibly explain such
 a synchronicity of beliefs?ﬂ  
ﬁTruth,ﬂ said a quiet voice in the crowd.  Solomon wheeled. ﬁWho said that?ﬂ 
 
The hand that went up belonged to a tiny Asian boy whose soft features suggested he might be Nepalese or Tibetan. ﬁMaybe there 
is a universal truth embedded in everyone™s 
soul. Maybe we all have the same story hiding inside, 
like a shared constant in our DNA. Maybe this collective 
truth is responsible for the similarity in all of our stories.ﬂ 
 
Solomon was beaming as he pressed his hands 
together and bowed reverently to the boy. ﬁThank you.ﬂ 
 
Everyone was quiet. 
 
ﬁTruth,ﬂ Solomon said, addressing the room. 
ﬁTruth has power. And if we all gravitate toward similar ideas, maybe we do so because those ideas are 
true . . . written deep within us. And when we hear the truth, even 
if we don™t understand it, we feel that truth 
resonate within us . . . vibrating with our unconscious wisdom. Perhaps the truth is not learned by us, but rather, the truth is re-called . . . re-membered . . . re-cognized . . . as 
that which is already inside us.ﬂ 
 
The silence in the hall was complete. 
 Solomon let it sit for a long moment, then qui
etly said, ﬁIn closing, I should warn you that unveiling the truth is never easy. Throughout history, every period of enlightenment 
has been accompanied by darkness, pushing in opposition. Such are the laws of nature 

and balance. And if we look at the darkness growing in the world today, we have to realize that this means there is equal light 
growing. We are on the ve
rge of a truly great period of illumination, and all of usŠall of 
youŠare profoundly blessed to be living through this pivotal moment of 
history. Of all the people who have ever lived, in all the 
eras in history . . . we are in that narrow window of time during which we will bear 
witness to our ultimate renaissance. After m
illennia of darkness, we will see our sciences, 
our minds, and even our re
ligions unveil the truth.ﬂ  
Solomon was about to get a hearty round of applause when he held up his hand for 

silence. ﬁMiss?ﬂ He pointed directly to the c
ontentious blond girl in back with the cell 
phone. ﬁI know you and I didn™t agree on much, 
but I want to thank you. Your passion is an important catalyst in the coming cha
nges. Darkness feeds on apathy . . . and conviction is our most potent antidote. K
eep studying your faith. Study the Bible.ﬂ He smiled. ﬁEspecially the final pages.ﬂ 

 
ﬁThe Apocalypse?ﬂ she said. 

 
ﬁAbsolutely. The Book of Revelation is a vibrant example of our shared 
truth. The last book of the Bible tells the identi
cal story as countless other tr
aditions. They all predict the 
coming unveiling of great wisdom.ﬂ 

 
Someone else said, ﬁBut isn™
t the Apocalypse about the end of the world? You know, the 
Antichrist, Armageddon, the final 
battle between good and evil?ﬂ  
Solomon chuckled. ﬁWho here studies Greek?ﬂ 

 
Several hands went up. 
 
ﬁWhat does the word 
apocalypse literally mean?ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt means,ﬂ one student began, and 
then paused as if surprised. ﬁApocalypse means ‚to 
unveil™ . . . or ‚to reveal.™ ﬂ 
 
Solomon gave the boy a nod of approval. ﬁE
xactly. The Apocalypse is literally a reveal-
ation. The Book of Reveal-ation in the Bible pr
edicts an unveiling of great truth and unimaginable wisdom. The Apocalypse is not the 
end of the world, but rather it is the end of the world as we know it. The prophecy of the Apocalypse is just one of the Bible™s beautiful messages that has been distorted.ﬂ 
Solomon stepped to the front of the stage. ﬁBelieve me, the Apocalypse 
is coming . . . and it will be nothing like what we were 
taught.ﬂ 
 
High over his head, the bell began to toll.  The students erupted into bewildered and thunderous applause.  
 
 
 CHAPTER 112   
 Katherine Solomon
 was teetering on the edge of consciousness when she was jolted by the shock wave of a deafening explosion. 
 
Moments later, she smelled smoke. 

 
Her ears were ringing. 
 
There were muffled voices. Distant. Shouting. Footsteps. Suddenly she was breathing more clearly. The cloth had been pulled from her mouth.  

 
ﬁYou™re safe,ﬂ a man™s voice whispered. ﬁJust hold on.ﬂ  

 
She expected the man to pull the needle out of
 her arm but instead he was yelling orders. 
ﬁBring the medical kit . . . attach an IV to th
e needle . . . infuse lactated Ringer™s solution . . . get me a blood pressure.ﬂ As the man be
gan checking her vital signs, he said, ﬁMs. 

Solomon, the person who did this 
to you . . . where did he go?ﬂ 
 
Katherine tried to speak, but she could not. 
 
ﬁMs. Solomon?ﬂ the voice re
peated. ﬁWhere did he go?ﬂ 
 
Katherine tried to pry her eyes open, but she felt herself fading.  
ﬁWe need to know 
where he went,ﬂ the man urged. 
 
Katherine whispered three words in response, although she knew they made no sense. 
ﬁThe . . . sacred . . . mountain.ﬂ 

 
Director Sato stepped over the mangled steel door and descended a wooden ramp into the 

hidden basement. One of her ag
ents met her at the bottom. 
 
ﬁDirector, I think you™ll want to see this.ﬂ  
Sato followed the agent into a small room off the narrow hallway. The room was brightly 

lit and barren, except for a pile of clothing 
on the floor. She recognized Robert Langdon™s 
tweed coat and loafers.  
Her agent pointed toward the far wall
 at a large, caske
tlike container.  What in the world?  Sato moved toward the container, seeing now 
that it was fed by a clear plastic pipe that ran through the wall. Warily, she approached the tank. 

 
Now she could see that it had a small s
lider on top. She reached down and slid the 
covering to one side, revealing a small portal-like window. 
 
Sato recoiled. 

 
Beneath the Plexiglas . . . floated the submerged, vacant face of Professor Robert 
Langdon. 
 Light!  The endless void in which Langdon hovered was suddenly filled by a blinding sun. Rays of white-hot light streamed across the 
blackness of space, burning into his mind. 
 
The light was everywhere. 
 
Suddenly, within the radiant cloud before him,
 a beautiful silhouette appeared. It was a face . . . blurry and indistinct . . . two eyes 
staring at him across the void. Streams of light 
surrounded the face, and Langdon wondered if he was looking into the face of God. 
 
Sato stared down into the tank, wondering if Professor Langdon had any idea what had happened. She doubted it. After all, disorientation was the entire purpose of this technology. 
 
Sensory-deprivation tanks had been around since the fifties and were still a popular getaway for wealthy New Age experimenters. 
ﬁFloating,ﬂ as it was called, offered a transcendental back-to-the-womb experience 
. . . a kind of meditative aid that quieted 
brain activity by removing all sensory input
Šlight, sound, touch, and even the pull of gravity. In traditional tanks, the person would float on his back in a hyperbuoyant saline solution that kept his face above the water so he could breathe. 
 
In recent years, however, these tanks had taken a quantum leap. 
 Oxygenated perfluorocarbons.  This new technologyŠknown as Total Liquid Ventilation (TLV)Šwas so 
counterintuitive that few believed it existed. 
 Breathable liquid.  Liquid breathing had been a reality since 1966, when Leland C. Clark successfully kept alive a mouse that had been submer
ged for several hours in an oxygenated perfluorocarbon. In 1989, TLV technology made 
a dramatic appearance in the movie 
The Abyss, although few viewers realized that they were watching real science.  
Total Liquid Ventilation had been born of mode
rn medicine™s attempts to help premature 
babies breathe by returning them to the liq
uid-filled state of the womb. Human lungs, 
having spent nine months in utero, were 
no strangers to a liquid-filled state. 
Perfluorocarbons had once been too viscous to be fully breathable, but modern 
breakthroughs had made breathable liquids
 almost the consistency of water. 
 
The CIA™s Directorate of Science and TechnologyŠﬁthe Wizards of Langley,ﬂ as they were known within the intelligence communityŠhad worked extensively with 
oxygenated perfluorocarbons to develop technologies for the U.S. military. The navy™s 
elite deep-ocean diving teams found that 
breathing oxygenated liquid, rather than the 
usual heliox or trimix, gave them the ability to
 dive to much greater
 depths without risk of pressure sickness. Similarly, NASA and the 
air force had learned that pilots equipped 
with a liquid breathing apparatus rather than a traditional oxygen tank could withstand far higher g-forces than usual because liquid sp
read the g-force more evenly throughout the 
internal organs than gas did. 
 
Sato had heard that there were now ﬁextreme 
experience labsﬂ wher
e one could try these Total Liquid Ventilation tanksŠﬁMeditation Machines,ﬂ as they were called. This 

particular tank had probably been installed for its owner™s private experimentation, 
although the addition of heavy, lockable latches left little doubt in Sato™s mind that 
this tank had also been used for darker applications . . . an interrogation technique with which 
the CIA was familiar. 

 
The infamous interrogation technique of wate
r boarding was highly effective because the 
victim truly 
believed
 he was drowning. Sato knew of several classified operations in which sensory-deprivation tanks like these had been used to enhance that illusion to 

terrifying new levels. A victim submerged in breathable liquid could literally be 
ﬁdrowned.ﬂ The panic associated with the drowning experience usually made the victim unaware that the liquid he was breathing was slightly more viscous than water. When the 
liquid poured into his lungs, he would often black out from f
ear, and then awaken in the ultimate ﬁsolitary confinement.ﬂ 

 
Topical numbing agents, paralysis drugs, and 
hallucinogens were mixed with the warm 

oxygenated liquid to give the prisoner the sense he was entirely separated from his body. 

When his mind sent commands to move his 
limbs, nothing happened. The state of being 
ﬁdeadﬂ was terrifying on its own, but the true disorientation came fr
om the ﬁrebirthingﬂ 
process, which, with the aid of bright lights, cold air, and deaf
ening noise, could be extremely traumatic and painful. After a handf
ul of rebirths and subsequent drownings, the prisoner became so disorienta
ted that he had no idea if he was alive or dead . . . and 
he would tell the interrogator absolutely anything. 
 Sato wondered if she should wait for a me
dical team to extract Langdon, but she knew 
she didn™t have time. 
I need to know what he knows.  
ﬁTurn out the lights,ﬂ she said. ﬁAnd find me some blankets.ﬂ 
 
The blinding sun had vanished. 
 
The face had also disappeared. 

 
The blackness had returned, but Langdon could now hear distant whispers echoing across the light-years of emptiness. Muffled voices . . . unintelligible words. There were 

vibrations now . . . as if the world were about to shake apart. 
 
Then it happened. 
 
Without warning, the universe was ripped in tw
o. An enormous chasm opened in the void 
. . . as if space itself had ruptured at the seams. A 
grayish mist poured through the 
opening, and Langdon saw a terrifying sight. Disembodied hands were suddenly reaching 
for him, grabbing his body, trying 
to yank him out of his world. 
 
No! He tried to fight them off, but he had no arms . . . no fists. 
Or did he? Suddenly he felt his body materializing ar
ound his mind. His flesh had re
turned and it was being seized by powerful hands that were dragging him upward. 
No! Please!  But it was too late. 
 
Pain racked his chest as the hands heaved him through the opening. His lungs felt like 
they were filled with sand. I can™t breathe!
 He was suddenly on his back on the coldest, 
hardest surface he could imagine. Something 
was pressing on his chest, over and over, 
hard and painful. He was spewing out the warmth. 

 I want to go back.  He felt like he was a child being born from a womb. 

 
He was convulsing, coughing up liquid. He felt pain in his chest and neck. Excruciating pain. His throat was on fire. People were talking, trying to whisper, but it was deafening. His vision was blurred, and all he could s
ee was muted shapes. His skin felt numb, like 

dead leather. 
 
His chest felt heavier now . . . pressure. I can™t breathe!
  
He was coughing up more liquid. An overwhelming 
gag reflex seized him, and he gasped inward. Cold air poured into his lungs, and he felt like a newborn taking his first breath on earth. This world was excruciating. All Langdon wanted was to return to the womb. 
 Robert Langdon had no idea how much time had 
passed. He could feel now that he was lying on his side, wrapped in towels and bla
nkets on a hard floor. A familiar face was 
gazing down at him . . . but the streams of gl
orious light were gone. The echoes of distant chanting still hung in his mind. 

 Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . .  ﬁProfessor Langdon,ﬂ someone whispered. ﬁDo you know where you are?ﬂ 

 
Langdon nodded weakly, still coughing. 
 
More important, he had begun to 
realize what was going on tonight.  
 
 
 CHAPTER 113   
 
Wrapped in wool blankets, Langdon stood on wobbly legs and stared down at the open tank of liquid. His body had returned to him, 
although he wished it had not. His throat and lungs burned. This world felt hard and cruel. 

 
Sato had just explained the sensory-deprivation tank . . . adding that if she had not pulled him out, he would have died of starvation, or
 worse. Langdon had little doubt that Peter had endured a similar experience. 
Peter is in the in-between,
 the tattooed man had told 
him earlier tonight. 
He is in purgatory . . . Hamistagan. If Peter had endured more than 
one of those birthing processes, Langdon would not have been surprised if Peter had told his captor anything he had wanted to know.  
Sato motioned for Langdon to follow her, and he did, trudging slowly down a narrow 

hall, deeper into this bizarre lair that he 
was now seeing for the first time. They entered a 
square room with a stone table and eeri
e-colored lighting. Katherine was here, and Langdon heaved a sigh of relief. Even so, the scene was worrisome. 

 
Katherine was lying on her back on a stone table. Blood-soaked towels lay on the floor. A CIA agent was holding an IV bag above her, the tube connected to her arm.  
She was sobbing quietly. 
 
ﬁKatherine?ﬂ Langdon croaked, barely able to speak.  She turned her head, looking disorientated and confused. ﬁRobert?!ﬂ Her eyes widened with disbelief and then joy. ﬁBut I . . . saw you drown!ﬂ  
He moved toward the stone table. 

 
Katherine pulled herself to a seated position, ignoring her IV tube and the medical 
objections of the agent. Langdon reached the 
table, and Katherine reached out, wrapping 
her arms around his blanket-clad body, holdi
ng him close. ﬁThank God,ﬂ she whispered, 
kissing his cheek. Then she kissed him again, squeezing him as though she didn™t believe 

he was real. ﬁI don™t understand . . . how . . .ﬂ  
Sato began saying something about se
nsory-deprivation tanks and oxygenated perfluorocarbons, but Katherine clearly wasn™t listening. She just held Langdon close.  
ﬁRobert,ﬂ she said, ﬁPeter™s alive.ﬂ Her voice wavered as she recounted her horrifying reunion with Peter. She described his physic
al conditionŠthe wheelchair, the strange 
knife, the allusions to some kind of ﬁsacrifi
ce,ﬂ and how she had been left bleeding as a 
human hourglass to persuade 
Peter to cooperate quickly.  
Langdon could barely speak. ﬁDo you . . . have any idea where . . . they went?!ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe said he was taking Peter to the sacred mountain.ﬂ 

 
Langdon pulled away and stared at her. 
 
Katherine had tears in her eyes. ﬁHe said he
 had deciphered the grid on the bottom of the 
pyramid, and that the pyramid told 
him to go to the sacred mountain.ﬂ 
 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ Sato pressed, ﬁdoes that mean anything to you?ﬂ 

 
Langdon shook his head. ﬁNot at all.ﬂ Still, he felt a surge of hope. ﬁBut if he got the information off the bottom of the pyramid, we can get it, too.ﬂ 
I told him how to solve it.
  
Sato shook her head. ﬁThe pyramid™s gone. We™ve looked. He took it with him.ﬂ 

 
Langdon remained silent a moment, closing his ey
es and trying to recall what he had seen on the base of the pyramid. The grid of symbols had been one 
of the last images he had 
seen before drowning, and trauma had a way 
of burning memories deeper into the mind. 
He could recall some of the grid, defi
nitely not all of it, but maybe enough? 
 
He turned to Sato and said hurriedly, ﬁI may be able to remember enough, but I need you 
to look up something on the Internet.ﬂ 

 
She pulled out her BlackBerry. 
 
ﬁRun a search for ‚The Order Eight Franklin Square.™ ﬂ 
 Sato gave him a startled look but began typing without questions.  
Langdon™s vision was still blurry, and he was only now starting to process his strange surroundings. He realized that the stone table on which they were leaning was covered with old bloodstains, and the wall to his right was entirely 
plastered with pages of text, photos, drawings, maps, and a giant we
b of strings interconnecting them. 
 My God.  Langdon moved toward the strange collage, st
ill clutching the blankets around his body. Tacked on the wall was an utterly bizarre collection of informationŠpages from ancient 
texts ranging from black magic to Christian 
Scripture, drawings of symbols and sigils, 
pages of conspiracy-theory Web sites, and sa
tellite photos of Washington, D.C., scrawled with notes and question marks. One of th
e sheets was a long list of words in many 
languages. He recognized some of them as 
sacred Masonic words, others as ancient magic words, and others fr
om ceremonial incantations. 
 Is that what he™s looking for?  
A word?  
Is it that simple?
  Langdon™s long-standing skepticism about th
e Masonic Pyramid was based largely on 
what it allegedly revealedŠthe location of the Ancient Mysteries. This discovery would have to involve an enormous vault filled with thousands upon thousands of volumes that 
had somehow survived the long-lost ancient lib
raries in which they had once been stored. It all seemed impossible. 
A vault that big? Beneath D.C.? Now, however, his recollection of Peter™s lecture at Phillips Exeter, combined with thes
e lists of magic words, had 
opened another startling possibility.  
Langdon most definitely did 
not believe in the power of magic words . . . and yet it 
seemed pretty clear that the tattooed man di
d. His pulse quickened as he again scanned 
the scrawled notes, the maps, the texts, the printouts, and all the interconnected strings and sticky notes. 
 
Sure enough, there was one recurring theme. 

 
My God, he™s looking for the verbum significatium . . . the Lost Word. Langdon let the thought take shape, recalling fragments of Peter™s lecture. 
The Lost Word is what he™s looking for! That™s what he believes is buried here in Washington.
  
Sato arrived beside him. ﬁIs this what 
you asked for?ﬂ She handed him her BlackBerry. 
 
Langdon looked at the eight-by-eight grid of numbers on the screen. ﬁExactly.ﬂ He grabbed a piece of scrap pa
per. ﬁI™ll need a pen.ﬂ 
 Sato handed him one from her pocket. ﬁPlease hurry.ﬂ 

 
Inside the basement office of the Director
ate of Science and Technology, Nola Kaye was once again studying the redacted document 
brought to her by sys-sec Rick Parrish. What the hell is the CIA director doing with a file about ancient pyramids and secret underground locations?  
She grabbed the phone and dialed. 
 
Sato answered instantly, sounding tense. ﬁNola, I was just about to call you.ﬂ  
ﬁI have new information,ﬂ Nola said. ﬁI™m 
not sure how this fits, but I™ve discovered there™s a redactedŠﬂ 

 
ﬁForget it, whatever it is,ﬂ Sato interrupted. 
ﬁWe™re out of time. We failed to apprehend 

the target, and I have every reason to believe he™s about to carry out his threat.ﬂ  
Nola felt a chill. 

 
ﬁThe good news is we know exactly where he™s going.ﬂ Sato took a deep breath. ﬁThe bad news is that he™s carrying a laptop with him.ﬂ 
 
 
  CHAPTER 114    
Less than ten miles away, Mal™akh tucked th
e blanket around Peter Solomon and wheeled him across a moonlit parking lot into 
the shadow of an enormous building. The 
structure had exactly thirty-three outer column
s . . . each precisely thirty-three feet tall. 
The mountainous structure was deserted at 
this hour, and nobody would ever see them back here. Not that it mattered. From a dist
ance, no one would think twice about a tall, kindly-looking man in a long black coat taki
ng a bald invalid for an evening stroll.  
When they reached the rear entrance, Mal™
akh wheeled Peter up close to the security 
keypad. Peter stared at it defiantly, clearly having no intention of entering the code.  
Mal™akh laughed. ﬁYou think you™re here to let me in? Have you forgotten so soon that I 
am one of your brethren?ﬂ He reached out 
and typed the access code that he had been 
given after his initiation to the thirty-t
hird degree.  The heavy door clicked open.  
Peter groaned and began struggling in the wheelchair.  
ﬁPeter, Peter,ﬂ Mal™akh cooed. ﬁPicture Kather
ine. Be cooperative, and she will live. You 

can save her. I give you my word.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh wheeled his captive inside and relocked the door behind them, his heart racing 
now with anticipation. He pushed Peter through some hallways to an elevator and pressed 
the call button. The doors opened, and Mal™akh backed in, pulling the wheelchair along 
with him. Then, making sure Peter could 
see what he was doing, he reached out and 
pressed the uppermost button. 

 
A look of deepening dread crossed Peter™s tortured face. 

 
ﬁShh . . .ﬂ Mal™akh whispered, gently stroking Peter™s shaved head as the elevator doors 
closed. ﬁAs you well know . . . the secret is how to die.ﬂ  I can™t remember all the symbols!  Langdon closed his eyes, doing his best to recall the precise locations of the symbols on 
the bottom of the stone pyramid, but even his ei
detic memory did not have that degree of 
recall. He wrote down the few symbols he could remember, placing each one in the 

location indicated by Franklin™s magic square. 

 
So far, however, he saw nothing that made any sense. 
   
ﬁLook!ﬂ Katherine urged. ﬁYou must be on th
e right track. The first row is all Greek lettersŠthe same kinds of symbols are being arranged together!ﬂ 

 
Langdon had noticed this, too, but he could not think of any Greek word that fit that configuration of letters and spaces. 
I need the first letter.
 He glanced again at the magic 
square, trying to recall the letter that had been in the number 
one spot near the lower left corner. Think! He closed his eyes, trying to picture the base of the pyramid. 
The bottom row . . . next to the left-hand corner . . . what letter was there?  
For an instant, Langdon was back in the tank, racked with terror, staring up through the Plexiglas at the bottom of the pyramid. 

 
Now, suddenly, he saw it. He opened his eyes, breathing heavily. ﬁThe first letter is H!ﬂ  
Langdon turned back to the grid and wrote in the first letter. The word was still 
incomplete, but he had seen enough. Suddenly 
he realized what the word might be. 
 µ!  
Pulse pounding, Langdon typed a new search into the BlackBerry. He entered the English 
equivalent of this well-known Greek word. The first hit that appeared was an 

encyclopedia entry. He read it a
nd knew it had to be right.  HEREDOM n. a significant word
 in ﬁhigh degreeﬂ Freemasonry, from French Rose Croix 
rituals, where it refers to a mythical mountain in Scotland, th
e legendary site of the first such Chapter. From the Greek µ originating 
from Hieros-domos, Greek for Holy House.   
ﬁThat™s it!ﬂ Langdon exclaimed, incredul
ous. ﬁThat™s where they went!ﬂ  
 
Sato had been reading over his shoulder and looked lost. ﬁTo a mythical mountain in 

Scotland?!ﬂ 

 
Langdon shook his head. ﬁNo, to a building in Washington whose code name is 

Heredom.ﬂ 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 115   
 
The House of the TempleŠknown among its brethren as HeredomŠhad always been 

the crown jewel of the Masonic Scottish R
ite in America. With its steeply sloped, 
pyramidical roof, the building was named fo
r an imaginary Scottish mountain. Mal™akh 

knew, however, there was nothing imaginary about the treasure hidden here. 

 
This is the place,
 he knew. The Masonic Pyramid has shown the way.  
As the old elevator slowly made its way to
 the third floor, Mal™akh took out the piece of 
paper on which he had reorganized the grid of symbols using the Franklin Square. All the 
Greek letters had now shifted to the first row . . . along with one simple symbol. 
  
 
The message could not have been more clear. 

 Beneath the House of the Temple.  Heredom 

 The Lost Word is here . . . somewhere.  Although Mal™akh did not know precisely how to locate it, he was confident that the answer lay in the remaining symbols on 
the grid. Conveniently, when it came to 

unlocking the secrets of the Masonic Pyrami
d and of this building, no one was more 
qualified to help than Peter Solomon. 
The Worshipful Master himself.
  
Peter continued to struggle in the wheelchair, making muffled sounds through his gag. 
 
ﬁI know you™re worried about Katherine,ﬂ Mal™akh said. ﬁBut it™s almost over.ﬂ 
 
For Mal™akh, the end felt like it had arrived very suddenly. After all the years of pain and planning, waiting and searching . 
. . the moment had now arrived. 
 
The elevator began to slow, and he felt a rush of excitement. 

 
The carriage jolted to a stop. 
 
The bronze doors slid open, and Mal™akh gazed out at the glorious chamber before them. 
The massive square room was adorned with
 symbols and bathed in moonlight, which 
shone down through the oculus at the pinnacle of the ceiling high above. 

 
I have come full circle, Mal™akh thought.  
The Temple Room was the same place in which Peter Solomon and his brethren had so 

foolishly initiated Mal™akh as
 one of their own. Now the Masons™ most sublime secretŠ
something that most of the brethren did 
not even believe existedŠwas about to be unearthed.  ﬁHe won™t find anything,ﬂ Langdon said, still feeling groggy and disorientated as he followed Sato and the others up the wooden ramp out of the basement. ﬁThere is no 
actual Word. It™s all a metaphorŠa 
symbol of the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 
 
Katherine followed, with two agents assisting her weakened body up the ramp. 
 
As the group moved gingerly through the wr
eckage of the steel door, through the rotating painting, and into the living room, Langdon explai
ned to Sato that the Lost Word was one 
of Freemasonry™s most enduring symbolsŠa si
ngle word, written in an arcane language that man could no longer decipher. The Word, 
like the Mysteries themselves, promised to 
unveil its hidden power only to those enlightened enough to decrypt it. ﬁIt is said,ﬂ Langdon concluded, ﬁthat if you can possess and understand the Lost Word . . . then the 
Ancient Mysteries will become clear to you.ﬂ 
 
Sato glanced over. ﬁSo you believe this man is looking for a 
word?ﬂ  
Langdon had to admit it sounded absurd at f
ace value, and yet it answered a lot of 
questions. ﬁLook, I™m no specialist in ceremonial magic,ﬂ he said, ﬁbut from the 

documents on his basement walls . . . and from Katherine™s description of the untattooed 
flesh on his head . . . I™d say he™s hoping to find the Lost Word and inscribe it on his 
body.ﬂ  
Sato moved the group toward the dining room
. Outside, the helicopter was warming up, 
its blades thundering louder and louder. 
 
Langdon kept talking, thinking aloud. ﬁIf this guy truly believes he is about to unlock the power of the Ancient Mysteries, no symbol w
ould be more potent in his mind than the 
Lost Word. If he could find it 
and inscribe it on the top of his headŠa sacred location in itselfŠthen he would no doubt consider hims
elf perfectly adorned and ritualistically prepared to . . .ﬂ He paused, seeing Kather
ine blanch at the thought of Peter™s impending 
fate. 

 
ﬁBut, Robert,ﬂ she said weakly, her voice bare
ly audible over the helicopter blades. ﬁThis 
is good news, right? If he wants to inscribe the Lost Word on the top of his head before 
he sacrifices Peter, then we have time. He
 won™t kill Peter until he finds the Word. And, 

if there 
is no Word . . .ﬂ 
 
Langdon tried to look hopeful as the agents helped Katherin
e into a chair. ﬁUnfortunately, Peter still thinks you™re bleeding to death. He thinks the only way to save you is to cooperate with this lunatic . . .probably to help him find the Lost Word.ﬂ 
 
ﬁSo what?ﬂ she insisted. ﬁIf the Word doesn™t existŠﬂ 

 
ﬁKatherine,ﬂ Langdon said, staring deeply into her eyes. ﬁIf I believed you were dying, and if someone promised me I could save 
you by finding the Lost Word, then I would 
find this man a wordŠ
any wordŠand then I™d pray to God he kept his promise.ﬂ 
 
ﬁDirector Sato!ﬂ an agent shouted from the next room. ﬁYou™d better see this!ﬂ 
 
Sato hurried out of the dining room and saw 
one of her agents coming down the stairs 
from the bedroom. He was carrying a blond wig. 
What the hell?  
ﬁMan™s hairpiece,ﬂ he said, handing it to he
r. ﬁFound it in the dressing room. Have a 
close look.ﬂ 
 
The blond wig was much heavier than Sato expe
cted. The skullcap seemed to be molded 
of a thick gel. Strangely, the underside of the wig had a wire protruding from it. 
 
ﬁGel-pack battery that molds to your scalp,ﬂ the agent said. ﬁPowers a fiber-optic 
pinpoint camera hidden in the hair.ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ Sato felt around with her fingers until she found the tiny camera lens nestled 

invisibly within the blond bangs. ﬁThis thing™s a hidden camera?ﬂ 

 
ﬁVideo camera,ﬂ the agent said. ﬁStores footage on 
this tiny solid-state card.ﬂ He pointed to a stamp-size square of silicon embedded in
 the skullcap. ﬁProbably motion activated.ﬂ 
 Jesus, she thought. So that™s how he did it.  
This sleek version of the ﬁflower in the lapelﬂ
 secret camera had played a key role in the 
crisis the OS director was facing tonight. She glared at it a moment longer and then 
handed it back to the agent. 
 
ﬁKeep searching the house,ﬂ she said. ﬁI want every bit of information you can find on 
this guy. We know his laptop is missing, and I want to know exactly 
how he plans to connect it to the outside world while he™s on the move. Search his study for manuals, 
cables, anything at all that might gi
ve us a clue about his hardware.ﬂ  
ﬁYes, ma™am.ﬂ The agent hurried off. 

 
Time to move out. Sato could hear the whine of the helicopter blades at full pitch. She 
hurried back to the dining room, where 
Simkins had now ushered Warren Bellamy in 
from the helicopter and was gathering intel 
from him about the building to which they 
believed their target had gone. 
 House of the Temple.  ﬁThe front doors are sealed from within,ﬂ 
Bellamy was saying, still wrapped in a foil blanket and shivering visibly from his time out
side in Franklin Square. ﬁThe building™s 
rear entrance is your only way in. It™s got 
a keypad with an access PIN known only to the 
brothers.ﬂ  ﬁWhat™s the PIN?ﬂ Simkins demanded, taking notes. 

 
Bellamy sat down, looking too feeble to sta
nd. Through chattering teeth, he recited his access code and then added, ﬁThe address is 1733 Sixteenth, but you™ll want the access 

drive and parking area, behind the building. Kind of tricky to find, butŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI know exactly where it is,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁI™ll show you when we get there.ﬂ   
Simkins shook his head. ﬁYou™re not co
ming, Professor. This is a militaryŠﬂ 

 
ﬁThe hell I™m not!ﬂ Langdon fired back. ﬁPeter™s in there! And that building™s a labyrinth! Without someone to lead you in, you™
ll take ten minutes to find your way up to 
the Temple Room!ﬂ 

 
ﬁHe™s right,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁIt™s a maze. There 
is an elevator, but it™s old and loud and opens in full view of the Temple Room. If 
you hope to move in quietly, you™ll need to 
ascend on foot.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou™ll never find your way,ﬂ Langdon warned. ﬁFrom that rear entrance, you™re 
navigating through the Hall of Regalia, the Hall of Honor, the middle landing, the 
Atrium, the Grand StairŠﬂ 
 
ﬁEnough,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁLangdon™s coming.ﬂ 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 116   
 
The energy was growing.  
Mal™akh could feel it pulsing within him, moving up and down his body as he wheeled 

Peter Solomon toward the altar. 
I will exit this building infinitely more powerful than when I entered.
 All that remained now was to locate the final ingredient. 
 
ﬁVerbum significatium,ﬂ he whispered to himself. 
ﬁVerbum omnificum.ﬂ  
Mal™akh parked Peter™s wheelchair beside th
e altar and then circled around and unzipped the heavy daybag that sat on Peter™s lap. Reaching inside, he lifted out the stone pyramid 
and held it up in the moonlight, directly in 
front of Peter™s eyes, showing him the grid of 
symbols engraved on the bottom. ﬁAll thes
e years,ﬂ he taunted, ﬁand you never knew how the pyramid kept her secrets.ﬂ Mal™akh se
t the pyramid carefully 
on the corner of the altar and returned to the bag. ﬁAnd this talisman,ﬂ he continued, extracting the golden 
capstone, ﬁdid indeed bring order from chaos,
 exactly as promised.ﬂ He placed the metal 
capstone carefully atop the stone pyramid, and 
then stepped back to give Peter a clear 
view. ﬁBehold, your symbolon is complete.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s face contorted, and he tried in vain to speak. 
 
ﬁGood. I can see you have something you™d like 
to tell me.ﬂ Mal™akh roughly yanked out 
the gag. 
 
Peter Solomon coughed and gasped for severa
l seconds before he finally managed to 
speak. ﬁKatherine . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁKatherine™s time is short. If you want to sa
ve her, I suggest you do exactly as I say.ﬂ Mal™akh suspected she was probably already dead, or if not, very close. It made no 
difference. She was lucky to have lived long enough to say good-bye to her brother. 

 
ﬁPlease,ﬂ Peter begged, his voice ragged. ﬁSend an ambulance for her . . .ﬂ 
 
ﬁI will do exactly that. But first you must te
ll me how to access th
e secret staircase.ﬂ  Peter™s expression turned to one of disbelief. ﬁWhat?!ﬂ 

 
ﬁThe staircase. Masonic legend speaks of stairs that descend hundreds of feet to the secret location where the Lost Word is buried.ﬂ 
 
Peter now looked panicked. 
 
ﬁYou know the legend,ﬂ Mal™akh baited. ﬁA secret staircase hidden beneath a stone.ﬂ He pointed to the central altarŠa huge block of granite with a gilded inscription in Hebrew: GOD SAID, ﬁLET THERE BE LIGHT
ﬂ AND THERE WAS LIGHT
. ﬁObviously, this is the right place. The entrance to the staircase must be hidden on one of the floors 
beneath us.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThere is no secret staircase in this building!ﬂ Peter shouted. 

 
Mal™akh smiled patiently and motioned upward. 
ﬁThis building is shaped like a pyramid.ﬂ 
He pointed to the four-sided vaulted ceiling that angled up to the square oculus in the center. 
 
ﬁYes, the House of the Temple is a pyramid, but what doesŠﬂ 

 
ﬁPeter, I have all night.ﬂ Mal™akh smoothed his white s
ilk robe over his perfect body. ﬁKatherine, however, does not. If you want her to live, you will tell me how to access the 
staircase.ﬂ 

 ﬁI already told you,ﬂ he declared, ﬁthere is no secret staircase 
in this building!ﬂ 
 ﬁNo?ﬂ Mal™akh calmly produced the sheet of paper on which he had reorganized the grid 

of symbols from the base of the pyramid. ﬁThis is the Masonic Pyramid™s final message. 

Your friend Robert Langdon helped me decipher it.ﬂ 

 
Mal™akh raised the paper and held it in front of Peter™s eyes. The Worshipful Master 
inhaled sharply when he saw it. Not only had the sixty-four symbols 
been organized into clearly meaningful grou
ps . . . but an actual image had materialized out of the chaos. 
 
An image of a staircase . . . beneath a pyramid. 

 
Peter Solomon stared in disbelief at the 
grid of symbols before him. The Masonic 
Pyramid had kept its secret for generations. 
Now, suddenly, it was being unveiled, and he felt a cold sense of foreboding in the pit of his stomach. 

 The pyramid™s final code.  At a glance, the true meaning of these symbol
s remained a mystery to Peter, and yet he 
could immediately understand why the ta
ttooed man believed what he believed. 
 He thinks there is a hidden staircase beneath the pyramid called Heredom. He misunderstands these symbols.     
 
ﬁWhere is it?ﬂ the tattooed 
man demanded. ﬁTell me how to find the staircase, and I will 
save Katherine.ﬂ 
 
I wish I could do that, Peter thought. But the staircase is not real. The myth of the 
staircase was purely symbolic . . . part of 
the great allegories of Masonry. The Winding 
Staircase, as it was known, appeared on the second-degree tracing boards. It represented man™s intellectual climb toward the Divine
 Truth. Like Jacob™s ladder, the Winding 
Staircase was a symbol of the pathway to heav
en . . . the journey of man toward God . . . 
the connection between the earthly and spiritual realms. Its steps represented the many 

virtues of the mind. 

 
He should know that, Peter thought. He endured all the initiations.  
Every Masonic initiate learned of the symbolic staircase 
that he could ascend, enabling him ﬁto participate in the my
steries of human science.ﬂ Fr
eemasonry, like Noetic Science 
and the Ancient Mysteries, revered the untapped potential of the human mind, and many 
of Masonry™s symbols re
lated to human physiology.  The mind sits like a golden capstone atop the physical body. The 
Philosopher™s Stone. Through the staircase of the spine, energy ascends and descends, circulating, connecting the heavenly mind to the physical body.  
Peter knew it was no coincidence that the spine was made up of exactly 
thirty-three
 vertebrae. 
Thirty-three are the degrees of Masonry.
 The base of the spine, or sacrum, literally meant ﬁsacred bone.ﬂ 
The body is indeed a temple. The human science that 
Masons revered was the ancient understanding of how to use that temple for its most 
potent and noble purpose. 
 
Unfortunately, explaining the truth to this ma
n was not going to help Katherine at all. Peter gazed down at the grid of symbols and 
gave a defeated sigh. ﬁYou™re right,ﬂ he lied. ﬁThere is indeed a secret staircase beneath this building. And as soon as you send help to Katherine, I™ll take you to it.ﬂ 
 
The man with the tattoos simply stared at him. 

 
Solomon glared back, eyes defiant. ﬁEither save 
my sister and learn the 
truth . . . or kill us both and remain ignorant forever!ﬂ 

 
The man quietly lowered the paper and shook 
his head. ﬁI™m not happy with you, Peter. 
You failed your test. You still take me for 
a fool. Do you truly believe I don™t understand what it is I seek? Do you think I have 
not yet grasped my true potential?ﬂ 
 
With that, the man turned his back and slipped 
off his robe. As the white silk fluttered to the floor, Peter saw for the first time th
e long tattoo running up the man™s spine. 
 Dear God . . .  Winding up from the man™s white loincloth, an
 elegant spiral staircase ascended the 
middle of his muscular back. Each stai
r was positioned on a different vertebra. 
Speechless, Peter let his eyes ascend the staircas
e, all the way up to the base of the man™s 
skull. 
 
Peter could only stare. 
 
The tattooed man now tipped his shaved head ba
ckward, revealing the circle of bare flesh on the pinnacle of his skull. The virgin skin was bordered by a single snake, looped in a circle, consuming itself. 

 At-one-ment.  Slowly now, the man lowered his head and turned to face Peter. The massive double-

headed phoenix on his chest stared out through dead eyes. 
 ﬁI am looking for the Lost Word,ﬂ the man sa
id. ﬁAre you going to help me . . . or are you 
and your sister going to die?ﬂ 
 
You know how to find it, Mal™akh thought. You know something you™re not telling me.  
Peter Solomon had revealed things under inte
rrogation that he probably didn™t even recall now. The repeated sessions in and out of the deprivation tank had left him delirious and 
compliant. Incredibly, when he spilled his 
guts, everything he told Mal™akh had been consistent with the legend of the Lost Word. 

 The Lost Word is not a metaphor . . . it is
 real. The Word is written in an ancient 
language . . . and has been hidden for ages. The Word is capable of bringing unfathomable power to anyone who grasps its true meaning. The Word remains hidden to 
this day . . . and the Masonic Pyramid has the power to unveil it.  
ﬁPeter,ﬂ Mal™akh now said, staring into his captive™s eyes, ﬁwhen you looked at that grid of symbols . . . you saw something. You had a revelation. This grid 
means something to 
you. Tell me.ﬂ 

 
ﬁI will tell you nothing until you send help to Katherine!ﬂ 

 
Mal™akh smiled at him. ﬁBelieve me, the prospe
ct of losing your sister is the least of your worries right now.ﬂ Without another word, 
he turned to Langdon™s daybag and started removing the items he had packed in his basement. Then he began meticulously 

arranging them on the sacrificial altar. 

 A folded silk cloth. Pure white.  
A silver censer. Egyptian myrrh. 

 
A vial of Peter™s blood. Mixed with ash.  
A black crow™s feather. His sacred stylus. 

 
The sacrificial knife. Forged of iron from a meteorite in the 
desert of Canaan.  
ﬁYou think I am afraid to die?ﬂ Peter s
houted, his voice racked with anguish. ﬁIf Katherine is gone, I have nothing left! You™ve murdered my entire family! You™ve taken 
everything from me!ﬂ 

 
ﬁNot everything,ﬂ Mal™akh replied. ﬁNot yet.ﬂ He reached into the day-bag and pulled out 
the laptop from his study. He turned it on and 
looked over at his captive. ﬁI™m afraid you 

have not yet grasped the true nature of your predicament.ﬂ 
 
   CHAPTER 117   
 
Langdon felt his stomach drop as the CIA helicopte
r leaped off the lawn, banked hard, and accelerated faster than he ever imagin
ed a helicopter could move. Katherine had 
stayed behind to recuperate with Bellamy 
while one of the CIA agents searched the 
mansion and waited for a backup team. 
 Before Langdon left, she had kissed him on the 
cheek and whispered, ﬁBe safe, Robert.ﬂ  
Now Langdon was holding on for dear life as th
e military helicopter finally leveled out 
and raced toward the House of the Temple. 

 
Seated beside him, Sato was yelling up to
 the pilot. ﬁHead for Dupont Circle!ﬂ she shouted over the deafening noise. ﬁWe™ll set down there!ﬂ  
Startled, Langdon turned to her. ﬁDupont?! That™s 
blocks
 from the House of the Temple! 
We can land in the Temple parking lot!ﬂ 

 
Sato shook her head. ﬁWe need to enter the building quietly. If our target hears us comingŠﬂ 

 
ﬁWe don™t have time!ﬂ Langdon argued. ﬁThis lu
natic is about to murder Peter! Maybe 
the sound of the helicopter will scare him and make him stop!ﬂ 
 
Sato stared at him with ice-cold eyes. ﬁA
s I have told you, Peter Solomon™s safety is 
not my primary objective. I belie
ve I™ve made that clear.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was in no mood for another national-security lecture. ﬁLook, 
I™m the only one on board who knows his way through that buildingŠﬂ 
 
ﬁCareful, Professor,ﬂ the director warned. ﬁYou are here as a member of my team, and I 
will have your complete cooperation.ﬂ She paus
ed a moment and then added, ﬁIn fact, it 
might be wise if I now apprised you fully 
of the severity of our crisis tonight.ﬂ  
Sato reached under her seat and pulled out a sleek titanium briefcase, which she opened 
to reveal an unusually complicated-looking computer. When
 she turned it on, a CIA logo materialized along with
 a log-in prompt.  
As Sato logged in, she asked, ﬁProfessor, do you remember the blond hairpiece we found 

in the man™s home?ﬂ 

 ﬁYes.ﬂ  
ﬁWell, hidden within that wig was a tiny fibe
r-optic camera . . . concealed in the bangs.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA hidden camera? I don™t understand.ﬂ 

 
Sato looked grim. ﬁYou will.ﬂ Sh
e launched a file on the laptop.  
ONE MOMENT PLEASE
 . . . 
 
DECRYPTING FILE
 . . .  
A video window popped up, filling the entire screen. Sato lifted the briefcase and set it on Langdon™s thighs, giving him a front-row seat. 
 
An unusual image materialized on the screen. 

 
Langdon recoiled in surprise. What the hell?!  
Murky and dark, the video was of a blindfolded man. He was dresse
d in the garb of a medieval heretic being led to the gallows
Šnoose around his neck, left pant leg rolled up to the knee, right sleeve roll
ed up to the elbow, and his shirt gaping open to reveal his bare chest. 
 
Langdon stared in disbelief. He had read enough about Masonic rituals to recognize exactly what he was looking at.  A Masonic initiate . . . preparing to enter the first degree.
  The man was very muscular and tall, with a familiar blond hairpiece and deeply tanned 

skin. Langdon recognized his features at once. The man™s tattoos had obviously been 
concealed beneath bronzing makeup. He was standing before a full-length mirror 

videotaping his reflection through 
the camera concealed in his wig. 
 But . . . why?  The screen faded to black. 

 
New footage appeared. A small, dimly lit, r
ectangular chamber. A dramatic chessboard 
floor of black-and-white tile. A low wooden altar, flanked on three sides by pillars, atop 
which burned flickering candles. 
 
Langdon felt a sudden apprehension. 
 Oh my God.  Filming in the erratic style of an amateu
r home video, the camera now panned up to the 
periphery of the room to reveal a small 
group of men observing the initiate. The men 
were dressed in ritual Masonic regalia. In the darkness, Langdon could not make out their 
faces, but he had no doubt where this ritual was taking place.  The traditional layout of this Lodge Room c
ould have been anywhere in the world, but 
the powder-blue triangular pediment above the 
master™s chair revealed it as the oldest 
Masonic lodge in D.C.ŠPotomac Lodge N
o. 5Šhome of George Washington and the 
Masonic forefathers who laid the cornerstone for the White House and the Capitol 

Building. 
 
The lodge was still active today. 
 
Peter Solomon, in addition to overseeing the Ho
use of the Temple, was the master of his 
local lodge. And it was at lodges like this one that a Masonic initiate™s journey always began . . . where he underwent the first three degrees of Freemasonry. 
 
ﬁBrethren,ﬂ Peter™s familiar voice declared, ﬁi
n the name of the Gr
eat Architect of the 
Universe, I open this lodge for the practice of Masonry in the first degree!ﬂ  
A gavel rapped loudly. 
 
Langdon watched in utter disbelief as the video progressed through a quick series of dissolves featuring Peter Solomon performing 
some of the ritual™s starker moments. 
 Pressing a shining dagger to the initiate™s bare chest . . . threatening impalement should the initiate ﬁinappropriately reveal the Mysterie
s of Masonryﬂ . . . describing the black-
and-white floor as representing ﬁthe living and the deadﬂ . . . outlining punishments that 
included ﬁhaving one™s throat cut across, one™s tongue torn out by its roots, and one™s body buried in the rough sands of the sea . . .ﬂ  Langdon stared. Am I really witnessing this?
 Masonic initiation rites had remained 
shrouded in secrecy for centuries. The only descriptions that had ever been leaked were written by a handful of estranged brothers. Langdon had read those accounts, of course, and yet to see an initiation with his own eyes . . . this was a much different story. 
 
Especially edited this way.
 Langdon could already tell that the video was an unfair piece of propaganda, omitting all the noblest aspects 
of the initiation and highlighting only the 
most disconcerting. If this video were released, Langdon knew it would become an 

Internet sensation over night. The anti-Masonic conspiracy theorists would feed on this like sharks. The Masonic organization, and especially Peter Solomon, would find 
themselves embroiled in a firestorm of cont
roversy and a desperate effort at damage 
control . . . even though the ritual was innocuous and purely symbolic.  
Eerily, the video included a biblical reference to human sacrifice . . . 
ﬁthe submission of Abraham to the Supreme Being by proffering Isaac, his firstborn son.ﬂ Langdon thought of Peter and willed the helicopter to fly faster. 
 
The video footage shifted now. 
 
Same room. Different night. A larger group 
of Masons looking on. Peter Solomon was 

observing from the master™s chair. This 
was the second degree. More intense now. Kneeling at the altar . . . vowing to ﬁfor
ever conceal the enigmas existing within 
Freemasonryﬂ . . . consenting to the penalty of ﬁhaving one™s chest cavity ripped open 
and pulsing heart cast upon the surface of the earth as offal for the ravenous beastsﬂ . . .  
Langdon™s own heart was pulsing wildly now as the video shifted yet again. Another 

night. A much larger crowd. A coffin
-shaped ﬁtracing boardﬂ on the floor. 
 
The third degree.  
This was the death ritualŠthe most rigorous 
of all the degreesŠthe moment in which the 
initiate was forced ﬁto face the final challenge of personal extinction.ﬂ This grueling interrogation was in fact the 
source of the common phrase to give someone the third 
degree. And although Langdon was very familiar with
 academic accounts of it, he was in 
no way prepared for what he now saw. 
 The murder.  In violent, rapid intercuts, the video displayed a chilling, victim™s point-of-view account 

of the initiate™s brutal murder. There were
 simulated blows to his head, including one 

with a Mason™s stone maul. All the while, a 
deacon mournfully told the story of ﬁthe 
widow™s sonﬂŠHiram AbiffŠthe master Ar
chitect of King Solomon™s temple, who 
chose to die rather than reveal
 the secret wisdom he possessed. 
 
The attack was mimed, of course, and yet 
its effect on camera was bloodcurdling. After 
the deathblow, the initiateŠnow ﬁdead to his former selfﬂŠwas lowered into his 

symbolic coffin, where his eyes were shut 
and his arms were crossed like those of a 
corpse. The Masonic brothers rose and mour
nfully circled his dead body while a pipe organ played a march of the dead. 

 
The macabre scene was deeply disturbing. 

 
And it only got worse. 
 
As the men gathered around their slain brothe
r, the hidden camera clearly displayed their 
faces. Langdon now realized that Solomon was not the only famous man in the room. 

One of the men peering down at the initiate in his coffin was on television almost daily. 

 
A prominent U.S. senator. 

 Oh God . . .  The scene changed yet again. Outside now . . . nighttime . . . the same jumpy video 
footage . . . the man was walking down a city street . . . strands of blond hair blowing in front of the camera . . . turning a corner . . .the camera angle lowering to something in the man™s hand . . . a dollar bill . . . a close-up focusing on the Great Seal . . . the all-seeing eye . . . the unfinished pyramid . . . and then, abruptly, pulling away to reveal a 

similar shape in the distance . . . a massive pyramidical building . . . with sloping sides rising to a truncated top.  The House of the Temple.  A soul-deep dread swelled within him. 

 
The video kept moving . . . 
the man hurrying toward the building now . . . up the multitiered staircase . . . toward the giant 
bronze doors . . . between the two seventeen-ton sphinx guardians.  A neophyte entering the pyramid of initiation.
  Darkness now. 
 
A powerful pipe organ played in the distance . . . and a new image materialized. 
 The Temple Room.  Langdon swallowed hard.  On-screen, the cavernous space was alive with 
electricity. Beneath the oculus, the black 
marble altar shone in the m
oonlight. Assembled around it, se
ated on hand-tooled pigskin chairs, awaited a somber council of distinguish
ed thirty-third-degree Masons, present to bear witness. The video now panned across thei
r faces with slow and deliberate intention.  
Langdon stared in horror. 
 
Although he had not seen this coming, what 
he was looking at made perfect sense. A 
gathering of the most decorated and accomplis
hed Masons in the most powerful city on 
earth would logically include many influen
tial and well-known indivi
duals. Sure enough, seated around the altar, adorned in their long silk gloves, Masonic aprons, and glistening jewels, were some of the country™s most powerful men. 

 Two Supreme Court justices . . .  
The secretary of defense . . .  
The speaker of the House . . .  Langdon felt ill as the video continued panning across the faces of those in attendance.  Three prominent senators . . . including the majority leader . . .  
The secretary of homeland security . . .
  
And . . .  The director of the CIA . . .  Langdon wanted only to look away, but he could not. The scene was utterly mesmerizing, 
alarming even to him. In an instant, he had come to understand the source of Sato™s 

anxiety and concern. 
 
Now, on-screen, the shot dissolved into a single shocking image. 
 
A human skull . . . filled with dark crimson liquid. The famed 
caput mortuum was being offered forth to the initiate by the slender hands of Peter Solomon, whose gold Masonic ring glinted in the candlelight. The red liquid was wine . . . and yet it shimmered like 
blood. The visual effect was frightful.  
The Fifth Libation, Langdon realized, having read firsthand accounts of this sacrament in 
John Quincy Adams™s 
Letters on the Masonic Institution
. Even so, to see it happen . . . to see it calmly witnessed by America™s most pow
erful men . . . this was as arresting an 
image as any Langdon had ever seen. 

 The initiate took the skull in his hands . . . his face reflected in the calm surface of the 
wine. ﬁMay this wine I now drink become a deadly poison to me,ﬂ
 he declared, ﬁshould I ever knowingly or willfully violate my oath.ﬂ
  Obviously, this initiate had intended to violate his oath beyond all imagination. 

 
Langdon could barely get his mind around what 
would happen if this video were made 
public. No one would understand. The government would be thrown into upheaval. The 
airwaves would be filled with the voices of anti-Masonic groups, fundamentalists, and 
conspiracy theorists spewing hatred and fear, launching a Puritan witch hunt all over again. 
 
The truth will be twisted, Langdon knew. As it always is with the Masons.
  
The truth was that the brotherhood™s focus on d
eath was in fact a bold celebration of life. Masonic ritual was designed to awaken the 
slumbering man inside, lifting him from his 

dark coffin of ignorance, raising him into the light, and giving him eyes to see. Only 

through the death experience could man fully understand his 
life experience. Only 
through the realization that his days on earth were finite could he grasp the importance of 

living those days with honor, integrity, and service to his fellow man. 
 Masonic initiations were startling because they were meant to be transformative. Masonic 
vows were unforgiving because they were m
eant to be reminders that man™s honor and 
his ﬁwordﬂ were all he could take from this world. Masonic teachings were arcane because they were meant to be 
universal
 . . . taught through a common language of symbols and metaphors that transcended religions, cultures, and races . . . creating a 

unified ﬁworldwide consciousnessﬂ of brotherly love.  
For a brief instant, Langdon felt a glimmer of hope
. He tried to assure himself that if this 
video were to leak out, the public would be
 open-minded and tolera
nt, realizing that all spiritual rituals included asp
ects that would seem frighten
ing if taken out of contextŠcrucifixion reenactments, Jewish circumci
sion rites, Mormon baptisms of the dead, 
Catholic exorcisms, Islamic 
niqab, shamanic trance healing, the Jewish Kaparot 

ceremony, even the eating of the fi
gurative body and blood of Christ.  
I™m dreaming, Langdon knew. This video will create chaos. He could imagine what 
would happen if the prominent leaders of Ru
ssia or the Islamic world were seen in a 
video, pressing knives to bare chests, swearing violent oaths, performing mock murders, 
lying in symbolic coffins, and drinking wine from a human skull. The global outcry 
would be instantaneous and overwhelming. 

 God help us . . .  On-screen now, the initiate was raising the s
kull to his lips. He tipped it backward . . . 
draining the blood-red wine . . . sealing his oa
th. Then he lowered the skull and gazed out 
at the assembly around him. America™s most
 powerful and trusted men gave contented 
nods of acceptance. 
 
ﬁWelcome, brother,ﬂ Peter Solomon said. 
 
As the image faded to black, Langdon realized he had stopped breathing. 

 
Without a word, Sato reached over, closed th
e briefcase, and lifted it off his lap. Langdon turned to her trying to speak, but he could find no words. It didn™t matter. Understanding 
was written all over his face. Sato was right. Toni
ght was a national-security crisis . . . of 
unimaginable proportions. 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 118   
 
Dressed in his loincloth, Mal™akh padded back and forth in front of Peter Solomon™s 
wheelchair. ﬁPeter,ﬂ he whis
pered, enjoying every moment of his captive™s horror, ﬁyou 
forgot you have a second family . . . your Masonic brothers. And I will destroy them, too 
. . . unless you help me.ﬂ 
 
Solomon looked almost catatoni
c in the glow of the laptop sitting atop his thighs. ﬁPlease,ﬂ he finally stammered, glanci
ng up. ﬁIf this video gets out . . .ﬂ  
ﬁIf?ﬂ Mal™akh laughed. ﬁIf it gets out?ﬂ He motioned 
to the small cellular modem 
plugged into the side of his laptop. ﬁI™m connected to the world.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou wouldn™t . . .ﬂ 
 
I will, Mal™akh thought, enjoying Solomon™s horror. ﬁYou have the power to stop me,ﬂ he 
said. ﬁAnd to save your sister. But you have to tell me what I want to know. The Lost 
Word is hidden somewhere, Peter, and I know 
this grid reveals exactly where to find it.ﬂ 
 
Peter glanced at the grid of symbol
s again, his eyes revealing nothing.  
ﬁPerhaps this will help to inspire you.ﬂ Mal™
akh reached over Peter™s shoulders and hit a 
few keys on the laptop. An e-mail program la
unched on the screen, and Peter stiffened 
visibly. The screen now displayed an e-mail that Mal™a
kh had cued earlier tonightŠa video file addressed to a long list of major media networks. 
 
Mal™akh smiled. ﬁI think it™s time we share, don™t you?ﬂ 

 
ﬁDon™t!ﬂ  Mal™akh reached down and clicked the send button on the program. Peter jerked against 

his bonds, trying unsuccessfully to knock the laptop to the floor.  
 
ﬁRelax, Peter,ﬂ Mal™akh whispered. ﬁIt™s a massi
ve file. It will take a few minutes to go 
out.ﬂ He pointed to the progress bar: SENDING MESSAGE: 2% COMPLETE 
 
 
ﬁIf you tell me what I want to know, I™ll st
op the e-mail, and nobody will ever see this.ﬂ 
 
Peter was ashen as the ta
sk bar inched forward. SENDING MESSAGE: 4% COMPLETE 
 
 
Mal™akh now lifted the computer from Peter™s
 lap and set it on one of the nearby pigskin chairs, turning the screen so the other man c
ould watch the progress. Then he returned to Peter™s side and laid the pa
ge of symbols in his lap. ﬁThe legends say the Masonic Pyramid will unveil the Lost Word. This is 
the pyramid™s final code. I believe you know 
how to read it.ﬂ  
Mal™akh glanced over at the laptop. SENDING MESSAGE: 8% COMPLETE 
 
 Mal™akh returned his eyes to Peter. Solomon 
was staring at him, his gray eyes blazing 
now with hatred.  
Hate me, Mal™akh thought. The greater the emotion, the more
 potent the energy that will 
be released when the ritual is completed.  
At Langley, Nola Kaye pressed the phone to her ear, barely able to hear Sato over the 
noise of the helicopter. 
 
ﬁThey said it™s impossible to stop the file 
transfer!ﬂ Nola shouted. ﬁTo shut down local ISPs would take at least an hour, and if he™s got access to a wirele
ss provider, killing the 
ground-based Internet won™t stop 
him from sending it anyway.ﬂ 

 
Nowadays, stopping the flow of digital information had become nearly impossible. There 
were too many access routes to the Internet. Be
tween hard lines, Wi-Fi hot spots, cellular 
modems, SAT phones, superphones, and e-mail-
equipped PDAs, the only way to isolate a 
potential data leak was by destroying the source machine. 
 
ﬁI pulled the spec sheet on the UH-60 you™re flying,ﬂ Nola said, ﬁand it looks like you™re equipped with EMP.ﬂ 
 
Electromagnetic-pulse or EMP guns were now commonplace among law enforcement 

agencies, which used them primarily to stop ca
r chases from a safe distance. By firing a 
highly concentrated pulse of electromagnetic 
radiation, an EMP gun could effectively fry 
the electronics of any device it targetedŠcars, cell phones, computers. According to Nola™s spec sheet, the UH-60 had a chassis-mounted, laser-sighted, six-gigahertz 
magnetron with a fifty-dB-gain horn that 
yielded a ten-gigawatt pulse. Discharged directly at a laptop, the pulse would fry the computer™s motherboard and instantly erase 
the hard drive. 

 
ﬁEMP will be useless,ﬂ Sato yelled back. ﬁTarget is inside a stone building. No sight lines 

and thick EM shielding. Do you have any i
ndication yet if the video has gone out?ﬂ 
 
Nola glanced at a second monitor, which 
was running a continuous search for breaking news stories about the Masons. ﬁNot yet, ma™am. But if 
it goes public, we™ll know within seconds.ﬂ  
ﬁKeep me posted.ﬂ Sato signed off. 

 
Langdon held his breath as the helicopter dropped from the sky toward Dupont Circle. A 

handful of pedestrians scattered as the aircraft descended through an opening in the trees and landed hard on the lawn just south of the famous two-tiered 
fountain designed by the same two men who created the Lincoln Memorial. 

 
Thirty seconds later, Langdon was riding shotgun in a commandeered Lexus SUV, tearing up New Hampshire Avenue toward the House of the Temple. 

 
Peter Solomon was desperately trying to figur
e out what to do. All 
he could see in his mind were the images of Katherine bleeding in 
the basement . . . and of the video he had 
just witnessed. He turned his head slowly toward the laptop on the pigskin chair several 

yards away. The progress bar was almost a third of the way filled. 
SENDING MESSAGE: 29% COMPLETE 
 
 
The tattooed man was now walking slow circ
les around the square 
altar, swinging a lit censer and chanting to himself. Thick puffs
 of white smoke swirled up toward the 
skylight. The man™s eyes were wide now, and he
 seemed to be in a demonic trance. Peter 
turned his gaze to the ancient knife that sat 
waiting on the white silk cloth spread across 
the altar. 
 
Peter Solomon had no doubt that he would die 
in this temple tonight. The question was 
how to die. Would he find a way to save his sister and his brotherhood . . . or would his death be entirely in vain? 
 
He glanced down at the grid of symbols. Wh
en he had first laid eyes on the grid, the shock of the moment had blinded him . . . pr
eventing his vision from piercing the veil of 

chaos . . . to glimpse the startling truth. No
w, however, the real significance of these symbols had become crystal clear to him. He 
had seen the grid in an entirely new light.  
Peter Solomon knew exactly what he needed to do. 

 
Taking a deep breath, he gazed up at the moon through the oculus above. Then he began 

to speak. 
 All great truths are simple.
  Mal™akh had learned that long ago. 
 
The solution that Peter Solomon was now 
explaining was so graceful and pure that 
Mal™akh was sure that it could only be true. Incredibly, the solution to the pyramid™s final 
code was far simpler than he had ever imagined. 
 The Lost Word was right before my eyes.  In an instant, a bright ray of light pierced the murkiness of the history and myth 
surrounding the Lost Word. As promised, the Lost
 Word was indeed written in an ancient 
language and bore mystical power in every 
philosophy, religion, and science ever known to man. 
Alchemy, astrology, Kabbalah, Christianity, Buddhism, Rosicrucianism, Freemasonry, astronomy, physics, Noetics . . .
  Standing now in this initiation chamber atop the great pyramid of Heredom, Mal™akh 

gazed upon the treasure he had sought all thes
e years, and he knew he could not have 
prepared himself more perfectly. 

 Soon I am complete.  
The Lost Word is found.  In Kalorama Heights, a lone CIA agent stood 
amid a sea of garbage that he had dumped 
out of the trash bins that had been found in the garage. 
 
ﬁMs. Kaye?ﬂ he said, speaking to Sato™s analyst on the phone. ﬁGood thinking to search his garbage. I think I just found something.ﬂ 
 
Inside the house, Katherine Solomon was f
eeling stronger with every passing moment. 
The infusion of lactated Ringer™s solution had successfully raised her blood pressure and quelled her throbbing headache. She was resting now, seated in the dining room, with 
explicit instructions to remain still. Her ne
rves felt frayed, and she was increasingly 
anxious for news about her brother. 
 
Where is everybody? The CIA™s forensics team had not yet arrived, and the agent who 
had stayed behind was still off searching the premises. Bellamy had been sitting with her 

in the dining room, still wrapped in a foil bl
anket, but he, too, had wandered off to look 
for any information that might help the CIA save Peter. 

 
Unable to sit idly, Katherine pulled herself to
 her feet, teetered, and then inched slowly 
toward the living room. She found Bellamy in 
the study. The Architect was standing at an 
open drawer, his back to her, apparently too engrossed in its contents to hear her enter. 
 
She walked up behind him. ﬁWarren?ﬂ 

 
The old man lurched and turned, quickly shut
ting the drawer with his hip. His face was 
lined with shock and grief, his cheeks streaked with tears. 
 
ﬁWhat™s wrong?!ﬂ She glanced down at the drawer. ﬁWhat is it?ﬂ 
 Bellamy seemed unable to speak. He had the lo
ok of a man who had just seen something 
he deeply wished he had not. 
 
ﬁWhat™s in the drawer?ﬂ she demanded. 

 
Bellamy™s tear-filled eyes held hers for a long, sorrowful moment. Finally he spoke. 

ﬁYou and I wondered why . . . why this man seemed to hate your family.ﬂ 
 
Katherine™s brow furrowed. ﬁYes?ﬂ 

 
ﬁWell . . .ﬂ Bellamy™s voice caugh
t. ﬁI just found the answer.ﬂ  
 
 
 CHAPTER 119   
 
In the chamber at the top of 
the House of the Temple, the one who called himself 
Mal™akh stood before the great altar and gently massaged th
e virgin skin atop his head. Verbum significatium, he chanted in preparation. Verbum omnificum. The final ingredient had been found at last. 
 The most precious treasures are often the simplest.  Above the altar, wisps of fragrant smoke 
now swirled, billowing up from the censer. The 
suffumigations ascended through the shaft of
 moonlight, clearing a channel skyward 
through which a liberated soul could travel freely.  
The time had come. 

 
Mal™akh retrieved the vial of Peter™s darkened blood and uncorked it. With his captive 
looking on, he dipped the nib of the crow™s feather into the crimson tincture and raised it 
to the sacred circle of fles
h atop his head. He paused a moment . . . thinking of how long 

he had waited for this night. His great transformation was finally at hand. 
When the Lost Word is written on the mind of man, he is 
then ready to receive unimaginable power. Such was the ancient promise of apotheosis. 
So far, mankind had been unable to realize 
that promise, and Mal™akh had done what he could to keep it that way. 

 
With a steady hand, Mal™akh touched the nib of
 the feather to his skin. He needed no mirror, no assistance, only his sense of t
ouch, and his mind™s eye. Slowly, meticulously, 
he began inscribing the Lost Word inside the circular 
ouroboros on his scalp.  Peter Solomon looked on with an expression of horror. 
 
When Mal™akh finished, he closed his eyes, set down the feather, and let the air out of his lungs entirely. For the first time in his lif
e, he felt a sensation he had never known.  I am complete.  
I am at one.  Mal™akh had worked for years on the artifact 
that was his body, and now, as he neared his moment of final transformation, 
he could feel every line that had ever been inscribed on his flesh. I am a true masterpiece. Perfect and complete.
  
ﬁI gave you what you asked for.ﬂ Peter™s voice intruded. ﬁSend help to Katherine. And stop that file.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh opened his eyes and smiled. ﬁYou and I 
are not quite finished.ﬂ He turned to the altar and picked up the sacrificial knife, running his finger 
across the sleek iron blade. ﬁThis ancient knife was commissioned by God,ﬂ 
he said, ﬁfor use in a human sacrifice. 
You recognized it earlier, no?ﬂ 

 
Solomon™s gray eyes were like stone. ﬁI
t is unique, and I™ve heard the legend.ﬂ  
ﬁLegend? The account appears in
 Holy Scripture. You don™t believe
 it™s true?ﬂ  
Peter just stared. 
 Mal™akh had spent a fortune locating and obtaining this artifact. Known as the Akedah knife, it had been crafted over three thousand years ago from an iron meteorite that had 
fallen to earth. Iron from heaven, as the early mystics called it.
 It was believed to be the exact knife used by Abraham at the AkedahŠt
he near sacrifice of his son Isaac on Mount 

MoriahŠas depicted in Genesis. The knife™s astounding history included possession by popes, Nazi mystics, European alchemists, and private collectors. 
 
They protected and admired it, Mal™akh thought, but none dared unleash its true power by using it for its real purpose. Tonight, the Akedah knife would fulfill its destiny.  
The Akedah had always been sacred in Masonic ritual. In the very first degree, Masons celebrated 
ﬁthe most august gift ever offered to G
od . . . the submission of Abraham to the volitions of the supreme being by proffering Isaac, his firstborn . . .ﬂ  
The weight of the blade felt exhilarating in Mal™akh™s hand as he crouched down and used the freshly sharpened knife to sever the ropes binding Peter to his wheelchair. The 
bonds fell to the floor. 
 
Peter Solomon winced in pain as he atte
mpted to shift his cramped limbs. ﬁWhy are you 
doing this to me? What do you think this will accomplish?ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou of all people should understand,ﬂ Mal™akh replied. ﬁYou study the ancient ways. You know that the power of the mysteries relies on 
sacrifice . . . on releasing a human 
soul from its body. It has been 
this way since the beginning.ﬂ  
ﬁYou know nothing of sacrifice,ﬂ Peter said, his voice seething with pain and loathing.  
Excellent, Mal™akh thought. Feed your hatred. It will only make this easier.
  
Mal™akh™s empty stomach growled as he paced 
before his captive. ﬁThere is enormous 
power in the shedding of human blood. Ev
eryone understood that, from the early 
Egyptians, to the Celtic Druids, to the Chinese, to the Aztecs. There is magic in human 
sacrifice, but modern man has 
become weak, too fearful to make true offerings, too frail to give the life that is required for spiritual transformation. The an
cient texts are clear, though. Only by offering what is most sacred can man access the ultimate power.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYou consider me a sacred offering?ﬂ  
Mal™akh now laughed out loud. ﬁYou really don™t understand yet, do you?ﬂ 
 
Peter gave him an odd look. 

 
ﬁDo you know why I have a deprivation tank in my home?ﬂ Mal™akh 
placed his hands on his hips and flexed his elaborately decorated body, which was still covered only by a loincloth. ﬁI have been practicing . . . preparing . . . anticipating the moment when I am 
only mind . . . when I am released from this mo
rtal shell . . . when I have offered up this beautiful body to the gods in sacrifice. I am the precious one! 
I am the pure white lamb!ﬂ 
 
Peter™s mouth fell open but no words came out. 

 
ﬁYes, Peter, a man must offer to the gods that
 which he holds most dear. His purest white 

dove . . . his most precious and worthy offering. You are not precious to me. 
You are not a worthy offering.ﬂ Mal™akh glared at him. ﬁDon™t you see? 
You are not the sacrifice, Peter 
. . . I am. Mine is the flesh that is the offering. 
I am the gift. Look at me. I have prepared, 
made myself worthy for my final journey. 
I am the gift!ﬂ  
Peter remained speechless. 

 
ﬁThe secret is how to die,ﬂ Mal™akh now said. ﬁMasons understand that.ﬂ He pointed to the altar. ﬁYou revere the ancient truths, and yet you are cowards. You understand the 
power of sacrifice and yet you keep a safe distance from death, performing your mock 
murders and bloodless death rituals. Tonight, your symbolic alta
r will bear witness to its true power . . . and its actual purpose.ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh reached down and grasped Peter Solomon™s left hand, pressing the handle of the 
Akedah knife into his palm. 
The left hand serves the darkness. This, too, had been planned. Peter would have no choice in the matter. Mal™akh could fathom no sacrifice 
more potent and symbolic than one performed on
 this altar, by this man, with this knife, 
plunged into the heart of an offering whose mortal flesh was wrapped like a gift in a 
shroud of mystical symbols. 
 
With this offering of 
self, Mal™akh would establish his rank in the hierarchy of demons. 
Darkness and blood were where the true power lay. The ancients knew this, the Adepts choosing sides consistent with their individual natures. Mal™akh had chosen sides wisely. Chaos was the natural law of the universe. Indifference was the engine of entropy. Man™s 
apathy was the fertile ground in which the dark spirits tended their seeds. 
 I have served them, and they will receive me as a god.  Peter did not move. He simply stared down 
at the ancient knife gripped in his hand.  
ﬁI will you,ﬂ Mal™akh taunted. ﬁI am a willing sacrifice. Your
 final role has been written. You will transform me. You w
ill liberate me from my body. 
You will do this, or you will lose your sister and your brotherhood. You w
ill truly be all alone.ﬂ He paused, smiling 
down at his captive. ﬁConsider this your final punishment.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s eyes rose slowly to meet Mal™akh™s. ﬁKilling 
you? A 
punishment? Do you think I 
will hesitate? You murdered my son. My mother. My entire family.ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo!ﬂ Mal™akh exploded with a force that startled even himself. ﬁYou are wrong! I did 
not murder your family! 
You did! It was you who made the choice 
to leave Zachary in 
prison! And from there, the wheels were in motion! 
You killed your family, Peter, not 
me!ﬂ 

 
Peter™s knuckles turned white, his fingers clenching the knife in rage. ﬁYou know nothing of why I left Zachary in prison.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI know everything!ﬂ Mal™akh fired back. ﬁI was there. You claimed you were trying to 
help him. Were you trying to 
help him when you offered him the choice between wealth or wisdom? Were you trying to 
help him when you gave him the ultimatum to join the 
Masons? What kind of father gives a child 
the choice between ‚wealth or wisdom™ and 
expects him to know how to handle it! What kind of father leaves his own son in a prison 

instead of flying him home to safety!ﬂ 
Mal™akh now moved in front of Peter and 
crouched down, placing his tattooed face only inch
es from his face. ﬁBut most important . 
. . what kind of father can look his own son in the eyes . . . even after all these years . . . and not even recognize him!ﬂ 
 
Mal™akh™s words echoed for several 
seconds in the stone chamber.  
Then silence. 

 In the abrupt stillness, Peter Solomon seemed
 to have been jolted from his trance. His 
face clouded now with a visage of total incredulity. 
 
Yes, Father. It™s me. Mal™akh had waited years for this moment . . . to take revenge on the 
man who had abandoned him . . . to stare into th
ose gray eyes and speak the truth that had been buried all these years. Now the moment
 was here, and he spoke slowly, longing to watch the full weight of his words gradually crush Peter Solomon™s soul. ﬁYou should be happy, Father. Your prodigal son has returned.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s face was now as pale as death. 

 
Mal™akh savored every moment. 
ﬁMy own father made the decision to leave me in prison 
. . . and in that instant, I vowed that he had rejected me for the last time. I was no longer 
his son. Zachary Solomon ceased to exist.ﬂ 

 
Two glistening teardrops welled suddenly in his father™s eyes, and Mal™akh thought they were the most beautiful thing he had ever seen. 

 
Peter choked back tears, staring up at Mal™a
kh™s face as if seeing him for the very first 
time. 

 
ﬁAll the warden wanted was money,ﬂ Mal™akh 
said, ﬁbut you refused. It never occurred 
to you, though, that my money was just as green as yours. The warden did not care who paid him, only that he was paid. When I o
ffered to pay him handsomely, he selected a 
sickly inmate about my size, dressed hi
m in my clothes, and beat him beyond all 
recognition. The photos you saw . . . and the sealed casket you buried . . . they were not mine. They belonged to a stranger.ﬂ 

 
Peter™s tear-streaked face contorted now with anguish and disbelief. ﬁOh my God . . . Zachary.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot anymore. When Zachary walked out of prison, he was transformed.ﬂ 

 
His adolescent physique and childlike face had 
drastically mutated when he flooded his 
young body with experimental growth hormones 
and steroids. Even his vocal cords had been ravaged, transforming his boyish voice into a permanent whisper. 
 Zachary became Andros.  
Andros became Mal™akh.  
And tonight . . . Mal™akh will become his greatest incarnation of all.
  At that moment in Kalorama Heights, 
Katherine Solomon stood over the open desk 
drawer and gazed down at what could be desc
ribed only as a fetishist™s collection of old 
newspaper articles and photographs.  ﬁI don™t understand,ﬂ she said, turning to Bellamy. ﬁThis lunatic was obviously obsessed 

with my family, butŠﬂ 

 
ﬁKeep going . . .ﬂ urged Bellamy, taking a 
seat and still looking deeply shaken.  
Katherine dug deeper into the newspaper ar
ticles, every one of which related to the Solomon familyŠPeter™s many successes, Kath
erine™s research, their mother Isabel™s 
terrible murder, Zachary Solomon™s widely pub
licized drug use, incarceration, and brutal murder in a Turkish prison. 
 
The fixation this man had on the Solom
on family was beyond fanatical, and yet 
Katherine saw nothing yet to suggest why.  
It was then that she saw the photographs. The first showed Zachary standing knee-deep in azure water on a beach dotted with whitewashed houses. 
Greece? The photo, she assumed, could have been taken only during 
Zach™s freewheeling drug days in Europe. Strangely, though, Zach looked healthier than he did in the paparazzi shots of an emaciated kid partying with the drug crowd. He 
looked more fit, str
onger somehow, more 
mature. Katherine never recalled him looking so healthy. 

 
Puzzled, she checked the date stamp on the photo. 

 But that™s . . . impossible.  The date was almost a full year 
after Zachary had died in prison.  
Suddenly Katherine was flipping desperately through the stack. All of the photos were of Zachary Solomon . . . gradually getting older. 
The collection appeared 
to be some kind of 
pictorial autobiography, chronicling a slow transformation. As
 the pictures progressed, Katherine saw a sudden and dramatic change
. She looked on in horror as Zachary™s body began mutating, his muscles bulging, and his 
facial features morphing from the obvious 
heavy use of steroids. His frame seemed to
 double in mass, and a haunting fierceness 
crept into his eyes. 

 I don™t even recognize this man!  He looked nothing like Katherine™s memories of her young nephew. 
 
When she reached a picture of him with a shaved head, she fe
lt her knees begin to buckle. Then she saw a photo of his bare body . . . 
adorned with the first traces of tattoos. 
 
Her heart almost stopped. ﬁOh my God . . .ﬂ 
 
   CHAPTER 120   
 
ﬁRight turn!ﬂ Langdon shouted from the backseat of the commandeered Lexus SUV.  
Simkins swerved onto S Street and gunned the 
vehicle through a tree-lined residential neighborhood. As they neared the corner of Sixteenth Street, the House of the Temple 
rose like a mountain on the right. 
 
Simkins stared up at the massive structure. 
It looked like someone had built a pyramid on 
top of Rome™s Pantheon. He prepared to turn
 right on Sixteenth toward the front of the building. 
 
ﬁDon™t turn!ﬂ Langdon ordered. ﬁGo straight! Stay on S!ﬂ  
Simkins obeyed, driving alongside 
the east side of the building.  
ﬁAt Fifteenth,ﬂ Langdon said, ﬁturn right!ﬂ 
 
Simkins followed his navigator, and moment
s later, Langdon had pointed out a nearly invisible, unpaved access road that bisected 
the gardens behind the House of the Temple. 
Simkins turned in to the drive and gunned th
e Lexus toward the re
ar of the building.  
ﬁLook!ﬂ Langdon said, pointing to the lone vehicle parked near the rear entrance. It was a large van. ﬁThey™re here.ﬂ 
 
Simkins parked the SUV and killed the engine. Quietly, everyone got out and prepared to 

move in. Simkins stared up at the monolithic structure. ﬁYou say the Temple Room is at 

the top?ﬂ  
Langdon nodded, pointing all the way to the pinnacle of the building. ﬁThat flat area on top of the pyramid is 
actually a skylight.ﬂ  
Simkins spun back to Langdon. ﬁThe Temple Room has a 
skylight?ﬂ  
Langdon gave him an odd look. ﬁOf 
course. An oculus to heaven . . . directly above the altar.ﬂ 

 
The UH-60 sat idling at Dupont Circle. 
 
In the passenger seat, Sato gnawed at her fingernails, awaiting news from her team. 

 Finally, Simkins™s voice crackle
d over the radio. ﬁDirector?ﬂ 
 ﬁSato here,ﬂ she barked. 
 
ﬁWe™re entering the building, but I have some additional recon for you.ﬂ 

 
ﬁGo ahead.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMr. Langdon just informed me that the room in which the target is most likely located 

has a very large skylight.ﬂ 
 
Sato considered the information for 
several seconds. ﬁUnderstood. Thank you.ﬂ 
 
Simkins signed off. 

 
Sato spit out a fingernail and turned to the pilot. ﬁTake her up.ﬂ  
 
 
 CHAPTER 121   
 
Like any parent who had lost a child, Peter Solomon had often imagined how old his boy 
would be now . . . what he would look like . . . and what he would have become. 

 
Peter Solomon now had his answers. 

 
The massive tattooed creature before him had 
begun life as a tiny, precious infant . . . 
baby Zach curled up in a wicker bassinette . . . taking his first fumbling steps across 
Peter™s study . . . learning to speak his first words. The fact that evil could spring from an 

innocent child in a loving family remained one
 of the paradoxes of the human soul. Peter 
had been forced to accept early on that although his own blood flowed in his son™s veins, the heart pumping that blood was his son™s own. Unique and singular . . . as if randomly chosen from the universe. 
 My son . . . he killed my mother, my friend Robert Langdon, and possibly my sister.  An icy numbness flooded Peter™s heart as he searched his son™s eyes for any connection . . . anything familiar. The man™s eyes, however
, although gray like Peter™s, were those of 
a total stranger, filled with a hatred and a 
vengefulness that were almost otherworldly. 
 
ﬁAre you strong enough?ﬂ his son taunted, glan
cing at the Akedah knife gripped in Peter™s hand. ﬁCan you finish what you started all those years ago?ﬂ  ﬁSon . . .ﬂ Solomon barely recognized his own voice. ﬁI . . . I loved . . . you.ﬂ 

 
ﬁTwice you tried to kill me. You abandoned me in
 prison. You shot me on Zach™s bridge. 
Now finish it!ﬂ  
For an instant, Solomon felt like he wa
s floating outside his own body. He no longer recognized himself. He was mi
ssing a hand, was totally bald, dressed in a black robe, sitting in a wheelchair, and clutching an ancient knife. 
 
ﬁFinish it!ﬂ the man shouted again, the tattoos
 on his naked chest rippling. ﬁKilling me is 
the only way you can save Katherine . . . the only way to save your brotherhood!ﬂ 
 
Solomon felt his gaze move to the laptop a
nd cellular modem on the pigskin chair. 
SENDING MESSAGE: 92% COMPLETE 
 
 
His mind could not shake the images of Katherin
e bleeding to death . . . or of his Masonic brothers. 
 
ﬁThere is still time,ﬂ the man whispere
d. ﬁYou know it™s the only choice. Release me 
from my mortal shell.ﬂ 

 
ﬁPlease,ﬂ Solomon said. ﬁDon™t do this . . .ﬂ 

 
ﬁYou did this!ﬂ the man hissed. ﬁYou forced your
 child to make an impossible choice! Do 
you remember that night? Wealth or wis
dom? That was the night you pushed me away 
forever. But I™ve returned, Fa
ther . . . and tonight it is your turn to choose. Zachary or Katherine? Which will it be? Will you kill you
r son to save your sister? Will you kill 
your son to save your brotherhood? Your country? Or will 
you wait until it™s too late? 
Until Katherine is dead . . . until the video is public . . . until you must live the rest of 

your life knowing you could have stopped these tragedies. Time is running out. You 
know what must be done.ﬂ 
 
Peter™s heart ached. You are not Zachary, he told himself. 
Zachary died long, long ago
. Whatever you are . . . and wherever you came from . . . you are not of me.
 And although Peter Solomon did not believe his own words, he knew he had to make a choice. 

 
He was out of time. 

 Find the Grand Staircase!  Robert Langdon dashed through darkened hallways, winding his way toward the center of the building. Turner Simkins remained close on his heels. As Langdon had hoped, he 
burst out into the building™s main atrium. 
 
Dominated by eight Doric columns of green 
granite, the atrium looked like a hybrid sepulcherŠGreco-Roman-EgyptianŠwith black marble statues, chandelier fire bowls, 
Teutonic crosses, double-headed phoenix medallions, and sconces bearing the head of 

Hermes. 

 
Langdon turned and ran toward the sweeping marble
 staircase at the far end of the atrium. 
ﬁThis leads directly to the Temple Room,ﬂ
 he whispered as the two men ascended as 
quickly and quietly as possible. 
 
On the first landing, Langdon came face-to-face 
with a bronze bust of Masonic luminary 
Albert Pike, along with the engraving of his most famous quote: 
WHAT WE HAVE 
DONE FOR OURSELVES ALONE DIES 
WITH US; WHAT WE HAVE DONE 
FOR OTHERS AND THE WORLD REMAINS AND IS IMMORTAL
.  
Mal™akh had sensed a palpable shift in the at
mosphere of the Temple Room, as if all the 
frustration and pain Peter Solomon had ever
 felt was now boiling to the surface . . . 
focusing itself like a laser on Mal™akh. 
 Yes . . . it is time.  Peter Solomon had risen from his wheelchai
r and was standing now, facing the altar, gripping the knife. 
 
ﬁSave Katherine,ﬂ Mal™akh coaxed, luring him 
toward the altar, backing up, and finally laying his own body down on the white shroud he had prepared. ﬁDo what you need to do.ﬂ 
 
As if moving through a nightmare, Peter inched forward. 

 
Mal™akh reclined fully now onto his back, gazing up through the oculus at the wintry moon. The secret is how to die. This moment could not 
be any more perfect. 
Adorned with the Lost Word of the ages, I offer myself by the left hand of my father.  
Mal™akh drew a deep breath. 
 Receive me, demons, for this is my body, which is offered for you.  Standing over Mal™akh, Peter Solomon was tr
embling. His tear-soaked eyes shone with desperation, indecision, anguish. He looked one last time toward the modem and laptop 
across the room. 

 
ﬁMake the choice,ﬂ Mal™akh whispered. ﬁRel
ease me from my flesh. God wants this
. You want this.ﬂ He laid his arms at his side
 and arched his chest forward, offering up his magnificent double-headed phoenix. 
Help me shed the body that clothes my soul.  Peter™s tearful eyes seemed to be staring through Mal™akh now, not even seeing him. 
 
ﬁI killed your mother!ﬂ Mal™akh whispered. 
ﬁI killed Robert Langdon! I™m murdering 
your sister! I™m destroying your brot
herhood! Do what you have to do!ﬂ  
Peter Solomon™s visage now contorted into a ma
sk of absolute grief and regret. He threw his head back and screamed in a
nguish as he raised the knife. 
 
Robert Langdon and Agent Simkins arrived breathless outside the Temple Room doors as 

a bloodcurdling scream erupted from withi
n. It was Peter™s voice. Langdon was certain.  
Peter™s cry was one of absolute agony. 
 I™m too late!
  Ignoring Simkins, Langdon seized the handles and yanked open the doors. The horrific 
scene before him confirmed his worst fears. There, in the center of the dimly lit chamber, 

the silhouette of a man with a shaved head stood
 at the great altar. He wore a black robe, and his hand was clutching a large blade. 
 
Before Langdon could move, the man was driving the knife down toward the body that 

lay outstretched on the altar. 
 
Mal™akh had closed his eyes. 
 
So beautiful. So perfect.  
The ancient blade of the Akedah knife had glin
ted in the moonlight as it arched over him. 
Scented wisps of smoke had spiraled upwar
d above him, preparing a pathway for his 
soon-to-be-liberated soul. His killer™s lone scream of torm
ent and desperation still rang through the sacred space as the knife came down. 
 I am besmeared with the blood of human sacrifice and parents™ tears.  Mal™akh braced for the glorious impact. 

 
His moment of transformation had arrived. 

 
Incredibly, he felt no pain. 
 
A thunderous vibration filled his body, deafening and deep. The room began shaking, and 
a brilliant white light blinded hi
m from above. The heavens roared. 
 
And Mal™akh knew it had happened. 
 Exactly as he had planned.  
Langdon did not remember sprinting toward 
the altar as the helicopter appeared overhead. Nor did he remember leaping with hi
s arms out-stretched . . . soaring toward 
the man in the black robe . . . trying desperat
ely to tackle him before he could plunge the knife down a second time. 
 
Their bodies collided, and Langdon saw a bright light sweep down through the oculus and illuminate the altar. He expected 
to see the bloody body of Peter Solomon on the altar, but the naked chest that shone in the light had no blood on it at all . . . only a tapestry of tattoos. The knife lay broken beside him, apparently having been driven into 
the stone altar rather than into flesh. 

 
As he and the man in the black robe crashe
d together onto the hard stone floor, Langdon 
saw the bandaged nub on the end of the man™s right arm, and he realized to his 

bewilderment that he had 
just tackled Peter Solomon.  
As they slid together across the stone fl
oor, the helicopter™s searchlights blazed down from above. The chopper thundered in low, its
 skids practically touching the expansive wall of glass. 
 
On the front of the helicopter, a strange-looking gun rotated, aiming downward through 
the glass. The red beam of its laser scope sliced through the skyli
ght and danced across the floor, directly toward Langdon and Solomon. 

 No!  But there was no gunfire from above . . . 
only the sound of the helicopter blades.  
Langdon felt nothing but an eerie ripple of energy that shimmered through his cells. 
Behind his head, on the pigskin chair, the laptop hissed strangely. He spun in time to see 
its screen suddenly flash to black. Unfortunately
, the last visible message had been clear. 
SENDING MESSAGE: 100% COMPLETE 
 
 Pull up! Damn it! Up!  The UH-60 pilot threw his rotors into overdri
ve, trying to keep his skids from touching 

any part of the large glass skylight. He knew the six thousand pounds of lift force that surged downward from his roto
rs was already straining the 
glass to its breaking point. Unfortunately, the incline of the pyramid ben
eath the helicopter was efficiently shedding the thrust sideways, robbing him of lift. 

 Up! Now!  He tipped the nose, trying to skim away, but the 
left strut hit the center of the glass. It was 
only for an instant, but that was all it took. 
 
The Temple Room™s massive oculus exploded in
 a swirl of glass and wind . . . sending a torrent of jagged shards plummeting into the room below. 
 Stars falling from heaven.  Mal™akh stared up into the beautiful white 
light and saw a veil of shimmering jewels 
fluttering toward him . . . accelerating . . . as
 if racing to shroud him in their splendor. 
 
Suddenly there was pain. 
 
Everywhere. 
 
Stabbing. Searing. Slashing. Razor-sharp knives piercing soft flesh. Chest, neck, thighs, face. His body tightened all at once, recoili
ng. His blood-filled mouth cried out as the 
pain ripped him from his trance. The white 
light above transformed itself, and suddenly, 
as if by magic, a dark helicop
ter was suspended above him, 
its thundering blades driving an icy wind down into the Temple Room, chilling Mal™akh to the core and dispersing the 

wisps of incense to the di
stant corners of the room. 

 
Mal™akh turned his head and saw the Akedah knife lying broken by his side, smashed 
upon the granite altar, which was covered in a blanket of shattered glass. Even after everything I did to him . . . Peter Solomon averte
d the knife. He refused to spill my blood
.  
With welling horror, Mal™akh raised his h
ead and peered down along the length of his 
own body. This living artifact was to have been his great offering. But it lay in tatters. His body was drenched in blood . . . huge shards of glass protruding from his flesh in all 

directions. 
 
Weakly, Mal™akh lowered his head back to the granite altar and stared up through the open space in the roof. The helicopter was gone now, in its place a silent, wintry moon. 
 
Wide-eyed, Mal™akh lay gasping for breat
h . . . all alone on the great altar. 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 122   
 The secret is how to die.  Mal™akh knew it had all gone wrong. There was no brilliant light. No wondrous reception. Only darkness and excruciating pain. 
Even in his eyes. He could see nothing, 

and yet he sensed movement all around him. Th
ere were voices . . . human voices . . . one of them, strangely, belonging to Robert Langdon. 
How can this be?  
ﬁShe™s okay,ﬂ Langdon kept repeating. ﬁKatherine is fine, Peter. Your sister is okay.ﬂ  
No, Mal™akh thought. Katherine is dead. She must be.  
Mal™akh could no longer see, could not tell if his eyes were even open, but he heard the helicopter banking away. An abrupt calm 
settled through the Temple Room. Mal™akh 

could feel the smooth rhythms of the earth becoming uneven . . . as if the ocean™s natural 

tides were being disrupted by a gathering storm. 

 Chao ab ordo.  Unfamiliar voices were shouting now, talki
ng urgently with Langdon about the laptop 
and video file. It™s too late, Mal™akh knew. The damage is done. By now the video was spreading like wildfire into 
every corner of a shocked worl
d, destroying the future of the brotherhood. Those most capable of spreading the wisdom must be destroyed. The ignorance of mankind is what helped the ch
aos grow. The absence of Light on earth is what nourished the Darkness that awaited Mal™akh. 
 I have done great deeds, and soon I will be received as a king.
  Mal™akh sensed that a lone individual had quietly approached. He knew who it was. He could smell the sacred oils he had 
rubbed into his father™s shaved body.  ﬁI don™t know if you can hear me,ﬂ Peter Solomo
n whispered in his ear. ﬁBut I want you to know something.ﬂ He touched a finger to th
e sacred spot atop Mal™akh™s skull. ﬁWhat you wrote here . . .ﬂ He paused. ﬁThis is not the Lost Word.ﬂ 
 
Of course it is, Mal™akh thought. You convinced me of that beyond a doubt.
  
According to legend, the Lost Word was writte
n in a language so ancient and arcane that 
mankind had all but forgotten how to read 
it. This mysterious language, Peter had 
revealed, was in fact the oldest language on earth.  The language of symbols.  In the idiom of symbology, there was 
one symbol that reigned supreme above all others. 
The oldest and most universal, 
this symbol fused all the ancient traditions in a single 
solitary image that represented the illumina
tion of the Egyptian sun god, the triumph of 
alchemical gold, the wisdom of the Philos
opher™s Stone, the purity of the Rosicrucian Rose, the moment of Creation, the All, the 
dominance of the astrol
ogical sun, and even the omniscient all-seeing eye that
 hovered atop the unfinished pyramid. 
 
The circumpunct. The symbol of the Source. The origin of all things.  
This is what Peter had told him moments a
go. Mal™akh had been skeptical at first, but then he had looked again at the grid, realizing that the image of th
e pyramid was pointing 
directly
 at the lone symbol of the circumpunc
tŠa circle with a dot in its center. The Masonic Pyramid is a map, he thought, recalling the legend, which points to the Lost Word. It seemed his father was telling the truth after all. 
 All great truths are simple.
  
The Lost Word is not a word . . . it is a symbol.
  Eagerly, Mal™akh had inscribed the great symbol of the circumpunct on his scalp. As he did so, he felt an upwelling of power and satisfaction. My masterpiece and offering are 
complete. The forces of darkness were waiting 
for him now. He would be rewarded for 
his work. This was to be his moment of glory . . . 

 
And yet, at the last instant, everything had gone horribly wrong.  
Peter was still behind him now, speaking words that Mal™akh could barely fathom. ﬁI lied 
to you,ﬂ he was saying. ﬁYou left me no choice. If I had revealed to you the true Lost Word, you would not have believed me, nor would you have understood.ﬂ 
 The Lost Word is . . . not the circumpunct?  ﬁThe truth is,ﬂ said Peter, ﬁthe Lost Word is known to all . . . but recognized by very few.ﬂ  
 
The words echoed in Mal™akh™s mind.  

 
ﬁYou remain incomplete,ﬂ Peter said, gently
 placing his palm on top of Mal™akh™s head. ﬁYour work is not yet done. But wherever you are going, please know this . . . you were loved.ﬂ 
 
For some reason, the gentle touch of his fath
er™s hand felt like it was burning through him 

like a potent catalyst that was initiating a chemical re
action inside Mal™akh™s body. Without warning, he felt a rush of blistering 
energy surging through his physical shell, as if every cell in his body were now dissolving. 
 
In an instant, all of his worldly pain evaporated. 

 
Transformation. It™s happening.  I am gazing down upon myself, a wreck of bloody 
flesh on the sacred slab of granite. My 
father is kneeling behind me, holding 
my lifeless head with his one remaining hand.  I feel an upwelling of rage . . . and confusion.  
This is not a moment for compassion . . . it is for revenge, for transformation . . . and yet still my father refuses to submit, refuses to fulfill his role, refuses to channel his pain and anger through the knife blade and into my heart.  
I am trapped here, hovering . . . tethered to my earthly shell.
  
My father gently runs a soft palm across my face to close my fading eyes.
  
I feel the tether release.
  
A billowing veil materializes around me, th
ickening and dimming the light, hiding the 
world from view. Suddenly time accelerates, and I am plunging into an abyss far darker than any I have ever imagined. Here, in the barre
n void, I hear a whispering . . . I sense a 
gathering force. It strengthens, mounting at a startling rate, surrounding me. Ominous and powerful. Dark and commanding.  I am not alone here.  
This is my triumph, my grand reception. And yet, for some reason, I am filled not with 
joy, but rather with boundless fear.   
It is nothing like I expect. 
  
The force is churning now, swirling around me with commanding strength, threatening to tear me apart. Suddenly, without warning, the blackness gathers 
itself like a great prehistoric beast and rears up before me.  
I am facing all the dark souls who have gone before.  
I am screaming in infinite terror . . . as the darkness swallows me whole.
   
 
 CHAPTER 123   
 
Inside the National Cathedral, Dean Galloway sensed a strange change in the air. He was not sure why, but he felt as if a ghostly shadow had evaporated . . . as if a weight had been lifted . . . far away and yet right here.  Alone at his desk, he was deep in thought. He was not sure how many minutes had 
passed when his phone rang. It was Warren Bellamy.  

 
ﬁPeter™s alive,ﬂ his Masonic brother said. ﬁI just heard the news. I knew you™d want to know immediately. He™s going to be okay.ﬂ 

 
ﬁThank God.ﬂ Galloway exhaled. ﬁWhere is he?ﬂ 

 
Galloway listened as Bellamy recounted the ex
traordinary tale of what had transpired after they had left Cathedral College.  

 
ﬁBut all of you are okay?ﬂ  
 
ﬁRecuperating, yes,ﬂ Bellamy said. ﬁThere
 is one thing, though.ﬂ He paused.  
ﬁYes?ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid . . . I think Langdon may have solved it.ﬂ 

 
Galloway had to smile. Somehow he was 
not surprised. ﬁAnd tell me, did Langdon 
discover whether or not the pyramid kept its 
promise? Whether or not it revealed what 
legend always claimed it would reveal?ﬂ 

 
ﬁI don™t know yet.ﬂ 
 It will, Galloway thought. ﬁYou need to rest.ﬂ  ﬁAs do you.ﬂ 
 No, I need to pray.   
 
 CHAPTER 124   
 
When the elevator door opened, the lights in the Temple Room were all ablaze. 
 
Katherine Solomon™s legs still felt rubbery as 
she hurried in to find her brother. The air in this enormous chamber was cold and smelle
d of incense. The scene that greeted her 
stopped her in her tracks. 
 In the center of this magnificent room, on a 
low stone altar, lay a bloody, tattooed corpse, a body perforated by spears of broken glass.
 High above, a gaping hole in the ceiling 
opened to the heavens.  
My God. Katherine immediately looked away, her eyes scanning for Peter. She found her brother sitting on the other side of the room, being tended to by a medic while talking 
with Langdon and Director Sato. 
 
ﬁPeter!ﬂ Katherine called, running over. ﬁPeter!ﬂ  
Her brother glanced up, his expression filling with relief. He was on his feet at once, moving toward her. He was wearing a simple 
white shirt and dark slacks, which someone 
had probably gotten for him from his office dow
nstairs. His right arm was in a sling, and 
their gentle embrace was awkward, but Kath
erine barely noticed. A familiar comfort 
surrounded her like a cocoon, as it always had, even in childhood, when her protective older brother embraced her. 

 
They held each other in silence. 
 
Finally Katherine whispered, ﬁAre you okay? 
I mean . . . really?ﬂ She released him, 
looking down at the sling and bandage where his right hand used to be. Tears welled again in her eyes. ﬁI™m so . . . so sorry.ﬂ 

 
Peter shrugged as if it were nothing of consequence. ﬁMortal flesh. Bodies don™t last forever. The important thing is that you™re okay.ﬂ 

 Peter™s lighthearted response tore at her emotions, reminding her of
 all the reasons she 
loved him. She stroked his head, feeling the 
unbreakable bonds of family . . . the shared 
blood that flowed in their veins.  
Tragically, she knew there was a 
third
 Solomon in the room tonight. The corpse on the 
altar drew her gaze, and Katherine shuddered 
deeply, trying to block out the photos she 
had seen. 
 
She looked away, her eyes now finding Robert Langdon™s. There was compassion there, 
deep and perceptive, as if Langdon somehow knew exactly what she was thinking. 
Peter knows. Raw emotion gripped KatherineŠrelief, 
sympathy, despair. She felt her brother™s 
body begin trembling like a child™s. It was 
something she had never witnessed in her 

entire life. 
 
ﬁJust let it go,ﬂ she whispere
d. ﬁIt™s okay. Just let it go.ﬂ  
Peter™s trembling grew deeper. 
 
She held him again, stroking the back of his head. ﬁPeter, you™ve always been the strong 
one . . . you™ve always been there for me. But I™m here for 
you now. It™s okay. I™m right 
here.ﬂ   
Katherine eased his head gently onto her shoulder . . . and the great Peter Solomon 
collapsed sobbing in her arms. 

 
Director Sato stepped away to take an incoming call. 

 
It was Nola Kaye. Her news, for a change, was good. 
 
ﬁStill no signs of distribution, ma™am.ﬂ She sounded hopeful. ﬁI™m confident we would 

have seen something by now. It
 looks like you contained it.ﬂ   
Thanks to you, Nola, Sato thought, glancing down at the laptop, which Langdon had seen complete its transmission. 
A very close call.
  
At Nola™s suggestion, the agent searching the mansion had checked the garbage cans, 
discovering packaging for a newly purchase
d cellular modem. With the exact model 
number, Nola had been able to cross-refe
rence compatible carriers, bandwidths, and service grids, isolating the laptop™s most
 likely access nodeŠa small transmitter on the 
corner of Sixteenth and CorcoranŠthree blocks from the Temple. 
 
Nola quickly relayed the information to Sato 
in the helicopter. On approach toward the House of the Temple, the pilot had performed 
a low-altitude flyover and pulsed the relay node with a blast of electroma
gnetic radiation, knocking it off-line only seconds before 
the laptop completed its transfer. 

 ﬁGreat work tonight,ﬂ Sato said. ﬁNow get some sleep. You™ve earned it.ﬂ 
 ﬁThank you, ma™am.ﬂ Nola hesitated. 

 
ﬁWas there something else?ﬂ 

 
Nola was silent a long moment, apparently c
onsidering whether or not to speak. ﬁNothing that can™t wait till morning, ma™am. Have a good night.ﬂ 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 125   
 
In the silence of an elegant bathroom on the 
ground floor of the House of the Temple, 
Robert Langdon ran warm water into a tile sink and eyed himself in the mirror. Even in 
the muted light, he looked like he felt . . . utterly spent. 
 His daybag was on his shoulder again, much 
lighter now . . . empty except for his 
personal items and some crumpled lecture notes
. He had to chuckle. His visit to D.C. 
tonight to give a lecture had turned out a bit more grueling than he™d anticipated. 
 
Even so, Langdon had a lot to be grateful for. 
 Peter is alive.  
And the video was contained.  As Langdon scooped handfuls of warm water ont
o his face, he gradually felt himself 
coming back to life. Everything was still a bl
ur, but the adrenaline in his body was finally dissipating . . . and he was feeling like hims
elf again. After drying his hands, he checked his Mickey Mouse watch. 
 My God, it™s late.  Langdon exited the bathroom and wound his wa
y along the curved wall of the Hall of HonorŠa gracefully arched passageway, lined with portraits of accomplished Masons . . 
. U.S. presidents, philanthropists, luminaries, and other influe
ntial Americans. He paused 
at an oil painting of Harry S. Truman and tried to imagine the man undergoing the rites, 

rituals, and studies required to become a Mason. 

 
There is a hidden world behind the one we all see. For all of us.  ﬁYou slipped away,ﬂ a voice said down the hall. 
 Langdon turned. 
 
It was Katherine. She™d been through hell tonight, and yet she looked suddenly radiant . . . rejuvenated somehow.  

 
Langdon gave a tired smile. ﬁHow™s he doing?ﬂ 

 
Katherine walked up and embraced him wa
rmly. ﬁHow can I ever thank you?ﬂ 

 
He laughed. ﬁYou know I didn™t do anything, right?ﬂ 
 
Katherine held him for a long time. ﬁPeter™s goi
ng to be fine . . .ﬂ She let go and looked deep into Langdon™s eyes. ﬁAnd he just told me something incredible . . . something 
wonderful.ﬂ Her voice trembled with an
ticipation. ﬁI need to go see it for myself. I™ll be 
back in a bit.ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhat? Where are you going?ﬂ 

 ﬁI won™t be long. Right now, Peter wants to speak with you . . . alone. He™s waiting in the library.ﬂ  
ﬁDid he say why?ﬂ 

 
Katherine chuckled and shook her head. ﬁYou know Peter and his secrets.ﬂ  
ﬁButŠﬂ 
 
ﬁI™ll see you in a bit.ﬂ 
 
Then she was gone. 
 
Langdon sighed heavily. He felt like he™d had enough secrets for one night. There were unanswered questions, of courseŠthe Ma
sonic Pyramid and the Lost Word among 
themŠbut he sensed that the answers, if they even existed, were not for him. 
Not as a non-Mason.  
Mustering the last of his energy, Langdon made
 his way to the Masonic library. When he 
arrived, Peter was sitting all alone at a ta
ble with the stone pyramid before him. 
 
ﬁRobert?ﬂ Peter smiled and waved him in. ﬁI™d like a word.ﬂ 

 
Langdon managed a grin. ﬁYes, I hear you 
lost one.ﬂ 
 
   CHAPTER 126   
 
The library in the House of the Temple was D.C.™s oldest public reading room. Its 
elegant stacks burgeoned with over a quarter of a million volumes, including a rare copy 

of the Ahiman Rezon, The Secrets of a Prepared Brother. In addition, the library displayed precious Masonic jewels, ritual artifacts, and even 
a rare volume that had been hand-printed by Benjamin Franklin. 

 
Langdon™s favorite library treasure, however, was one few ever noticed.  The illusion.
  Solomon had shown him long ago that from
 the proper vantage point, the library™s reading desk and golden table lamp created an un
mistakable optical illusion . . . that of a 
pyramid and shining golden capstone. Solomon 
said he always considered the illusion a silent reminder that the mysteries of Freem
asonry were perfectly visible to anyone and everyone if they were seen from the proper perspective. 
 Tonight, however, the mysteries of Freemasonry had materialized front and center. 

Langdon now sat opposite the Worshipful Master Peter Solomon and the Masonic 

Pyramid. 

 
Peter was smiling. ﬁThe ‚word™ you refer 
to, Robert, is not a legend. It is a reality.ﬂ  
Langdon stared across the table and finally spoke. ﬁBut . . . I don™t understand. How is that possible?ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhat is so difficult to accept?ﬂ 

 
All of it! Langdon wanted to say, searching his old friend™s eyes for any hint of common sense. ﬁYou™re saying you believe the Lost Word is 
real . . . and that it has actual power?ﬂ  
ﬁEnormous power,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁIt has the 
power to transform human kind by unlocking 
the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ 

 
ﬁA word?ﬂ Langdon challenged. ﬁPeter, I can
™t possibly believe a wordŠﬂ  
ﬁYou will believe,ﬂ Peter stated calmly. 
 
Langdon stared in silence.  ﬁAs you know,ﬂ Solomon continued, standing 
now and pacing around the table, ﬁit has long been prophesied that there will come a day when the Lost Word will be rediscovered 

. . . a day when it will be unearthed . . . 
and mankind will once again have access to its 
forgotten power.ﬂ 
 
Langdon flashed on Peter™s lecture about the Apocalypse. Although many people 

erroneously interpreted 
apocalypse as a cataclysmic end of the world, the word literally 
signified an ﬁunveiling,ﬂ predicted by the ancients to be that of great wisdom. 
The coming age of enlightenment. Even so, Langdon could not imagin
e such a vast change being ushered in by . . . a word.  
Peter motioned to the stone pyramid, which sat 
on the table beside its golden capstone. ﬁThe Masonic Pyramid,ﬂ he said. ﬁThe legenda
ry symbolon. Tonight it 
stands unified . . . and complete.ﬂ Reverently, he lifted the gol
den capstone and set it atop the pyramid. The 
heavy gold piece clicked softly into place. 

 
ﬁTonight, my friend, you have done what has never been done before. You have assembled the Masonic Pyramid, deciphered all 
of its codes, and in the end, unveiled . . . this.ﬂ  Solomon produced a sheet of paper and laid 
it on the table. Langdon recognized the grid of symbols that had been reorganized usi
ng the Order Eight Franklin Square. He had 
studied it briefly in the Temple Room. 

 
Peter said, ﬁI am curious to know if you can 
read this array of symbol
s. After all, you are the specialist.ﬂ 

 
Langdon eyed the grid. 
 Heredom, circumpunct, pyramid, staircase . . .    
Langdon sighed. ﬁWell, Peter, as you can probabl
y see, this is an allegorical pictogram. Clearly its language is metaphorical a
nd symbolic rather than literal.ﬂ 
 
Solomon chuckled. ﬁAsk a symbologist a si
mple question . . . Okay, tell me what you 
see.ﬂ 
 
Peter really wants to hear this?
 Langdon pulled the page toward
 him. ﬁWell, I looked at 
it earlier, and, in simple terms, I see that this grid is a 
picture . . . depicting heaven and earth.ﬂ 

 
Peter arched his eyebrows, looking surprised. ﬁOh?ﬂ 
 ﬁSure. At the top of the image, we have the word 
HeredomŠthe ‚Holy House™Šwhich I interpret as the House of God . . . or heaven.ﬂ   
ﬁOkay.ﬂ  
 
ﬁThe downward-facing arrow after Heredom signifies that the rest of the pictogram 
clearly lies in the realm 
beneath heaven . . . that being . . . earth
.ﬂ Langdon™s eyes glided now to the bottom of the grid. ﬁThe lowest two rows, those 
beneath the pyramid, 
represent the earth itselfŠterra firmaŠthe lo
west of all the realms. Fittingly, these lower 
realms contain the twelve ancient 
astrological signs, which represent the primordial 
religion of those first human souls who looked 
to the heavens and saw the hand of God in the movement of the stars and planets.ﬂ 

 
Solomon slid his chair closer and st
udied the grid. ﬁOkay, what else?ﬂ 
 
ﬁOn a foundation of astrology,ﬂ Langdon continued, ﬁthe great pyramid rises from the 
earth . . . stretching toward heaven . . . the enduring symbol of lost wisdom. It is filled 
with history™s great philosophies and religions . . . Egyptian, Pythagorean, Buddhist, 
Hindu, Islamic, Judeo-Christian, and on and on 
. . . all flowing upward, merging together, 
funneling themselves up through 
the transformative gateway 
of the pyramid . . . where they finally fuse into a single, unified human philosophy.ﬂ He paused. ﬁA single universal 

consciousness . . . a shared global vision of God . . . represented by the ancient symbol 
that hovers over the capstone.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThe circumpunct,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁA universal symbol for God.ﬂ 
 
ﬁRight. Throughout history, the circumpunct has been all things to 
all peopleŠit is the 
sun god Ra, alchemical gold, the all-seeing eye,
 the singularity point before the Big Bang, theŠﬂ 
 
ﬁThe Great Architect of the Universe.ﬂ 

 
Langdon nodded, sensing this was probably the same argument Peter had used in the 
Temple Room to sell the idea of 
the circumpunct as the Lost Word. 
 
ﬁAnd finally?ﬂ Peter asked. ﬁWhat about the staircase?ﬂ 

 
Langdon glanced down at the image of the stai
rs beneath the pyramid. ﬁPeter, I™m sure 
you know as well as anyone, this symbolizes the Winding Staircase of Freemasonry . . . 
leading upward out of the earthly
 darkness into the light . . . like Jacob™s ladder climbing 
to heaven . . . or the tiered human spine that connects ma
n™s mortal body to his eternal mind.ﬂ He paused. ﬁAs for the 
rest of the symbols, they appear 
to be a blend of celestial, Masonic, and scientific, all lending support to the Ancient Mysteries.ﬂ  
Solomon stroked his chin. ﬁAn elegant interpretation, Professor. I agree, of course, that 
this grid can be read as allegory, and yet . . .ﬂ His eyes flashed with deepening mystery. 
ﬁThis collection of symbols te
lls another story as well. A story that is far more revealing.ﬂ  
ﬁOh?ﬂ 
 
Solomon began pacing again, circling the tabl
e. ﬁEarlier tonight, inside the Temple 
Room, when I believed I was going to die, 
I looked at this grid, and somehow I saw 
past the metaphor, 
past the allegory, into the very heart of what these symbols are telling us.ﬂ 
He paused, turning abruptly to Langdon. ﬁThis grid reveals the exact location where the 
Lost Word is buried.ﬂ 

 
ﬁCome again?ﬂ Langdon shifted uneas
ily in his chair, suddenly fearing that the trauma of 
the evening had left Peter disorientated and confused.  
ﬁRobert, legend has always
 described the Masonic Pyramid as a mapŠa very 
specific
 mapŠa map that could guide the worthy to 
the secret location of the Lost Word.ﬂ 
Solomon tapped the grid of symbols in fr
ont of Langdon. ﬁI guarantee you, these symbols 
are exactly what legend says they are . . . a map. A specific diagram that reveals exactly 
where we will find the staircase that
 leads down to the Lost Word.ﬂ 
 
Langdon gave an uneasy laugh, treading carefully now. ﬁEven if I believed the Legend of 

the Masonic Pyramid, this grid of symbols can
™t possibly be a map. L
ook at it. It looks nothing like a map.ﬂ 

 
Solomon smiled. ﬁSometimes all it takes is a 
tiny shift of perspective to see something 
familiar in a totally new light.ﬂ 

 
Langdon looked again but saw nothing new. 
 
ﬁLet me ask you a question,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁWhen Masons lay cornerstones, do you know 

why we lay them in the northeast corner of a building?ﬂ 

 
ﬁSure, because the northeast corn
er receives the first rays of morning light. It is symbolic 
of the power of architecture to climb out of the 
earth into the light.ﬂ  
ﬁRight,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁSo perhaps you should look there for the first rays of light.ﬂ He motioned to the grid. ﬁIn the northeast corner.ﬂ  
Langdon returned his eyes to the page, movi
ng his gaze to the upper right or northeast 
corner. The symbol in that corner was . 

 
ﬁA downward-pointing arrow,ﬂ 
Langdon said, trying to grasp Solomon™s point. ﬁWhich 
means . . . 
beneath Heredom.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, Robert, not beneath,ﬂ Solomon replied. ﬁThink. This grid is not a metaphorical 
maze. It™s a 
map. And on a map, a directi
onal arrow that points down meansŠﬂ 
 ﬁSouth,ﬂ Langdon exclaimed, startled. 

 
ﬁExactly!ﬂ Solomon replied, grinning now 
with excitement. ﬁDue south! On a map, 
down
 is south. Moreover, on a map, the word 
Heredom would not be a metaphor for heaven, it 
would be the name of 
a geographic location.ﬂ  
ﬁThe House of the Temple? You™re saying this
 map is pointing . . . due south of this building?ﬂ 

 
ﬁPraise God!ﬂ Solomon said, laughi
ng. ﬁLight dawns at last.ﬂ  
Langdon studied the grid. ﬁBut, Peter . . . even if you™re right, due south of this building could be anywhere on a longitude that™s over twenty-four thousand miles long.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNo, Robert. You are ignoring the legend, which claims the Lost
 Word is buried in D.C. 
That shortens the line substantially. In addition, legend also claims that a large stone sits 
atop the opening of the staircase . . . and that this stone is engraved with a message in an 
ancient language . . . as a kind of marker so the worthy can find it.ﬂ  
Langdon was having trouble taking any of this seriously, and while he didn™t know D.C. well enough to picture what was due south of 
their current location, he was pretty certain there was no huge engraved stone atop a buried staircase. 
 
ﬁThe message inscribed on the stone,ﬂ Peter sa
id, ﬁis right here before our eyes.ﬂ He tapped the third row of the grid before Langdon. ﬁThis is the inscription, Robert! You™ve solved the puzzle!ﬂ 

 
Dumbfounded, Langdon studied
 the seven symbols. 
  
 
Solved? Langdon had no idea whatsoever what these seven disparate symbols could possibly mean, and he was damned sure they were 
not engraved anywhere in the nation™s 
capital . . . particularly on a giant stone over a staircase. 

 
ﬁPeter,ﬂ he said, ﬁI don™t see how this sheds any light at all. I know of no stone in D.C. engraved with this . . . message.ﬂ 
 
Solomon patted him on the shoulder. ﬁYou have
 walked past it and never seen it. We 
all have. It is sitting in plain view, like the mysteries themselves. And tonight, when I saw 
these seven symbols, I realized in an inst
ant that the legend was true. The Lost Word 
is buried in D.C. . . . and it does rest at the bottom of a long 
staircase beneath an enormous 
engraved stone.ﬂ 
 
Mystified, Langdon remained silent. 

 
ﬁRobert, tonight I believe you have earned the right to know the truth.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared at Peter, trying to process what he had just heard. ﬁYou™re going to tell me where the Lost Word is buried?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo,ﬂ Solomon said, standing up with a smile. ﬁI™m going to 
show you.ﬂ  
Five minutes later, Langdon was buckling himself into the backseat of the Escalade 

beside Peter Solomon. Simkins climbed in behi
nd the wheel as Sato approached across the parking lot. 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon?ﬂ the director said, lighting a ci
garette as she arrived. ﬁI™ve just made the 
call you requested.ﬂ 
 
ﬁAnd?ﬂ Peter asked th
rough his open window.  
ﬁI ordered them to give you access. Briefly.ﬂ 

 
ﬁThank you.ﬂ  Sato studied him, looking curious. ﬁI mu
st say, it™s a most unusual request.ﬂ 
 
Solomon gave an enigmatic shrug. 

 
Sato let it go, circling around to Langdon™s window and rapping with her knuckles.  
Langdon lowered the window. 

 
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ she said, with no hint of warmt
h. ﬁYour assistance tonight, while reluctant, 
was critical to our success . . . and for that, I thank you.ﬂ She took a long drag on her 

cigarette and blew it sideways. ﬁHowever, one final bit of advice. The next time a senior 
administrator of the CIA tells you she has a nati
onal-security crisis . . .ﬂ Her eyes flashed black. ﬁLeave the bullshit in Cambridge.ﬂ 

 
Langdon opened his mouth to speak, but Director
 Inoue Sato had already turned and was headed off across the parking lot toward a waiting helicopter. 

 
Simkins glanced over his shoulder, st
one-faced. ﬁAre you gentlemen ready?ﬂ 
 ﬁActually,ﬂ Solomon said, ﬁjust 
one moment.ﬂ He produced a small, folded piece of dark 
fabric and handed it to Langdon. ﬁRobert, I™d 
like you to put this on before we go anywhere.ﬂ  
Puzzled, Langdon examined the cloth. It was black velvet. As he unfolded it, he realized he was holding a Masonic hoodwinkŠthe traditional blindfold of a first-degree initiate. What the hell?  
Peter said, ﬁI™d prefer you not see where we™re going.ﬂ  
Langdon turned to Peter. ﬁYou want to blindfold me for the journey?ﬂ 
 
Solomon grinned. ﬁMy secret. My rules.ﬂ 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 127   
 
The breeze
 felt cold outside CIA headquarters in Langley. Nola Kaye was shivering as she followed sys-sec Rick Parrish across 
the agency™s moonlit central courtyard. 
 Where is Rick taking me?  The crisis of the Masonic video had been averted, thank God, but Nola still felt uneasy. The redacted file on the CIA director™s partition remained a mystery, and it was nagging 

at her. She and Sato would debrief in the mo
rning, and Nola wanted all the facts. Finally, she had called Rick Parrish and demanded his help. 

 
Now, as she followed Rick to some unknown location outside, Nola could not push the 

bizarre phrases from her memory: 

 
Secret location underground where the . . . somewhere in Washington, D.C., 
the coordinates . . . uncovered an ancient portal 
that led . . . warning the pyramid 
holds dangerous . . . decipher this engraved symbolon 
to unveil . . .  
ﬁYou and I agree,ﬂ Parrish said as they wa
lked, ﬁthat the hacker who spidered those keywords was definitely searching for information about the Masonic Pyramid.ﬂ 
 
Obviously, Nola thought.  
ﬁIt turns out, though, the hacker stumbled 
onto a facet of the Masonic mystery I don™t 
think he expected.ﬂ  ﬁWhat do you mean?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNola, you know how the CIA director sponsors an internal discussion forum for Agency 
employees to share their ideas 
about all kinds of things?ﬂ 

 
ﬁOf course.ﬂ The forums provided Agency pe
rsonnel a safe place to chat online about 
various topics and gave the director a kind of virtual gateway to his staff. 
 
ﬁThe director™s forums are hosted on his pr
ivate partition, and yet in order to provide access to employees of all clearance levels, they™re located outside the director™s classified firewall.ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhat are you getting at?ﬂ she demanded as
 they rounded a corner near the Agency cafeteria. 
 
ﬁIn a word . . .ﬂ Parrish pointed into the darkness. ﬁThat.ﬂ  
Nola glanced up. Across the plaza in front of them was a massive metal sculpture 
glimmering in the moonlight. 

 
In an agency that boasted over five hundred pieces of original art, this sculptureŠtitled 

KryptosŠwas by far the most famous. Greek for ﬁhidden,ﬂ 
Kryptos
 was the work of American artist James Sanborn and had become 
something of a legend here at the CIA. 
 
The work consisted of a massive S-shaped pa
nel of copper, set on its edge like a curling metal wall. Engraved into the expansive su
rface of the wall were nearly two thousand letters . . . organized into a baffling code. As if this were not enigmatic enough, 
positioned carefully in the area around the 
encrypted S-wall were numerous other 
sculptural elementsŠgranite sl
abs at odd angles, a compass rose, a magnetic lodestone, 
and even a message in Morse code that refe
renced ﬁlucid memoryﬂ and ﬁshadow forces.ﬂ 
Most fans believed that these pieces were cl
ues that would reveal how to decipher the 
sculpture. 
 
Kryptos was art . . . but it was also an enigma. 

 
Attempting to decipher its encoded secret had become an obsession for cryptologists both 

inside and outside the CIA. 
Finally, a few years back, a portion of the code had been broken, and it became national news. Although much of 
Kryptos™s code remained 
unsolved to this day, the sections that had been deciphered were so bizarre that they made the sculpture only more mysterious. It refe
renced secret underground locations, portals that led into ancient tombs, longitudes and latitudes . . .  
Nola could still recall bits and pieces of the deciphered sections: 
The information was 
gathered and transmitted underground to an unknown location . . . It was totally invisible . . . hows that possible . . . they used the earths magnetic field . . .
  Nola had never paid much attention to th
e sculpture or cared if it was ever fully deciphered. At the moment, however, she wa
nted answers. ﬁWhy are you showing me 

Kryptos?ﬂ  
Parrish gave her a conspiratorial smile and dr
amatically extracted a folded sheet of paper 
from his pocket. ﬁVoilà, the mysterious reda
cted document you were so concerned about. 
I accessed the complete text.ﬂ 

 
Nola jumped. ﬁYou snooped the director™s classified partition?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNo. That™s what I was getting at earlier. Have a look.ﬂ He handed her the file.  
Nola seized the page and unfolded it. When she saw the standard Agency headers at the 
top of the page, she cocked her head in surprise. 
 
This document was not classified. Not even close. 
 
 EMPLOYEE DISCUSSION BOARD: KRYPTOS
  
 
COMPRESSED STORAGE: THREAD #2456282.5 
 
Nola found herself looking at a series of postings that had been compressed into a single 

page for more efficient storage. 

 
ﬁYour keyword document,ﬂ Rick said, ﬁis some cipher-punks rambling about 
Kryptos.ﬂ  
Nola scanned down the document until she spotted a sentence containing a familiar set of 

keywords. 
 
Jim, the sculpture says it was transmitted to a 
secret location UN
DERGROUND where 
the info was hidden.   
ﬁThis text is from 
the director™s online Kryptos forum,ﬂ Rick explained. ﬁThe forum™s 
been going for years. There are literally 
thousands of postings. I™m not surprised 
one of them happened to contain all the keywords.ﬂ 

 
Nola kept scanning down until she spotted another posting containing keywords. 

 
Even though Mark said the code™s lat/long headings point somewhere in WASHINGTON, D.C., the
 coordinates he used were off by one degree--Kryptos basically points back to itself.   Parrish walked over to the statue and ran his palm across the cryptic sea of letters. ﬁA lot 
of this code has yet to be deciphered, and there are plenty of people who think the 
message might actually relate 
to ancient Masonic secrets.ﬂ 
 
Nola now recalled murmurs of a Masonic/
Kryptos link, but she tended to ignore the lunatic fringe. Then again, looking around at the various pieces of the sculpture arranged around the plaza, she realized that it was a 
code in piecesŠa symbolonŠjust like the 
Masonic Pyramid. 

 Odd.  For a moment, Nola could almost see 
Kryptos as a modern Masonic PyramidŠa code in 
many pieces, made of different materials, each
 playing a role. ﬁDo you think there™s any 
way Kryptos and the Masonic Pyramid might be hiding the same secret?ﬂ 

 
ﬁWho knows?ﬂ Parrish shot 
Kryptos a frustrated look. ﬁI doubt we™ll ever know the whole message. That is, unless someone can co
nvince the director to unlock his safe and 
sneak a peek at the solution.ﬂ 
 
Nola nodded. It was all coming back to her now. When 
Kryptos
 was installed, it arrived with a sealed envelope containing a complete
 decryption of the sculpture™s codes. The sealed solution was entrusted to thenŒCIA dir
ector William Webster, who locked it in his 

office safe. The document was allegedly still there, having been transferred from director 

to director over the years. 

 Strangely, Nola™s thoughts of
 William Webster sparked her 
memory, bringing back yet 
another portion of Kryptos™s deciphered text: IT™S BURIED OUT THERE SOMEWHERE.  WHO KNOWS THE EXACT LOCATION? 
 ONLY WW.   
Although nobody knew exactly what was buried out there, most people believed the 
WW was a reference to William Webster. Nola had heard whispers once that it referred in fact 

to a man named William WhistonŠa Royal So
ciety theologianŠalthough she had never 
bothered to give it much thought. 
 
Rick was talking again. ﬁI™ve got to admit, I™m 
not really into artists, but I think this guy 
Sanborn™s a serious genius. I was just looking online at his Cyrillic Projector
 project? It shines giant Russian letters from a 
KGB document on mind control. Freaky.ﬂ 
 Nola was no longer listening. She was examin
ing the paper, where she had found the third key phrase in another posting.  
Right, that whole section is verbatim from 
some famous archaeol
ogist™s diary, telling about the moment he dug down and 
uncovered an ANCIENT PORTAL that led to the 
tomb of Tutankhamen.  

 
The archaeologist who was quoted on Kryptos, Nola knew, was in fact famed 
Egyptologist Howard Carter. The next posting referenced him by name. 

 
I just skimmed the rest of Carter™s field notes online, and it sounds like he found a clay tablet warning the PYRAMID holds dangerous consequences for anyone who disturbs 
the peace of the pharaoh. A curse! Should we be worried? :)  
 
Nola scowled. ﬁRick, for God™s sake, this idiot™s pyramid reference isn™t even right. 
Tutankhamen wasn™t buried in a 
pyramid
. He was buried in the Valley of the Kings. Don™t cryptologists watch the Discovery Channel?ﬂ 

 
Parrish shrugged. ﬁTechies.ﬂ 

 
Nola now saw the final key phrase. 
 
Guys, you know I™m not a conspiracy theorist, but Jim and Dave had better 
decipher this ENGRAVED
 SYMBOLON to unveil its final secret before the world ends in 2012 . . . Ciao.  
 ﬁAnyhow,ﬂ Parrish said, ﬁI figured you™d want to know about the Kryptos forum before 
you accused the CIA director of harboring cl
assified documentation about an ancient 
Masonic legend. Somehow, I doubt a man as powe
rful as the CIA director has time for 
that sort of thing.ﬂ 
 
Nola pictured the Masonic video and its images
 of all the influential men participating in 
an ancient rite. 
If Rick had any idea . . .  
In the end, she knew, whatever Kryptos ultimately revealed, the message definitely had 
mystical undertones. She gazed up at the 
gleaming piece of artŠa three-dimensional 
code standing silently at the heart of one of the nation™s premier intelligence agenciesŠ

and she wondered if it would ever give up its final secret. 
 
As she and Rick headed back inside, Nola had to smile. 

 It™s buried out there somewhere.
   
 
 CHAPTER 128    This is crazy.
  Blindfolded, Robert Langdon could see nothing as the Escalade sped southward along the deserted streets. On the seat beside him, Peter Solomon remained silent. 
 Where is he taking me?  Langdon™s curiosity was a mix of intrigue and 
apprehension, his imagination in overdrive 
as it tried desperately to put the pieces together. Peter had 
not wavered from his claim. 
The Lost Word? Buried at the bottom of a staircase that™s covered by a massive, engraved stone? It all seemed impossible. 
 
The stone™s alleged engraving was still l
odged in Langdon™s memory . . . and yet the 
seven symbols, as far as he could tell, made no sense together at all. 
  
 The Stonemason™s Square: the symbol of honesty and being ﬁtrue.ﬂ  The letters Au: the scientific abbreviation for the element gold.  
The Sigma: the Greek letter S, the mathematical symbol for the sum of all parts.
  
The Pyramid: the Egyptian symbol of man reaching heavenward. 
 The Delta: the Greek letter D, the mathematical symbol for change.
  
Mercury: as depicted by its mo
st ancient alchemical symbol. 
 
The Ouroboros: the symbol of wholeness and at-one-ment. 
 
Solomon still insisted these seven symbols were 
a ﬁmessage.ﬂ But if this was true, then it 
was a message Langdon had no idea how to read. 

 
The Escalade slowed suddenly and turned sharply 
right, onto a different surface, as if into 
a driveway or access road. Langdon perked up, li
stening intently for clues as to their 
whereabouts. They™d been driving for less than ten minutes, and although Langdon had 
tried to follow in his mind, he had lost his be
arings quickly. For all he knew, they were 
now pulling back into the House of the Temple. 
 The Escalade came to a stop, and Langdon heard the window roll down. 

 
ﬁAgent Simkins, CIA,ﬂ their driver announced. ﬁI believe you™re expecting us.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes, sir,ﬂ a sharp military voice replied. 
ﬁDirector Sato phoned ahead. One moment 
while I move the security barricade.ﬂ 

 
Langdon listened with rising confusion, now sens
ing they were entering a military base. 
As the car began moving again, along an unusually smooth stretch of pavement, he 

turned his head blindly toward Solomon. ﬁWhere are we, Peter?ﬂ he demanded. 

 
ﬁDo not remove your blindfold.ﬂ Peter™s voice was stern. 
 
The vehicle continued a short distance and again slowed to a stop. Simkins killed the 
engine. More voices. Military. Someone asked fo
r Simkins™s identification. The agent got 

out and spoke to the men in hushed tones. 

 
Langdon™s door was suddenly being opened, and powerful hands assisted him out of the 

car. The air felt cold. It was windy. 
 
Solomon was beside him. ﬁRobert, just
 let Agent Simkins lead you inside.ﬂ 
 
Langdon heard metal keys in a lock . . . and th
en the creak of a heavy iron door swinging open. It sounded like an ancient bulkhead. 
Where the hell are they taking me?!
  
Simkins™s hands guided Langdon in the directi
on of the metal door. They stepped over a 
threshold. ﬁStraight ahead, Professor.ﬂ 
 
It was suddenly quiet. Dead. Deserted. The air inside smelled sterile and processed. 
 
Simkins and Solomon flanked Langdon now, 
guiding him blindly down a reverberating 
corridor. The floor felt like stone beneath his loafers. 
 
Behind them, the metal door slammed loudly, and Langdon jumped. The locks turned. He 

was sweating now beneath his blindfold. He wanted only to tear it off.  
They stopped walking now. 
 
Simkins let go of Langdon™s arm, and there wa
s a series of electronic beeps followed by 
an unexpected rumble in front of them, which Langdon imagined had to be a security 

door sliding open automatically. 
 
ﬁMr. Solomon, you and Mr. Langdon continue on alone. I™ll wait for you here,ﬂ Simkins 
said. ﬁTake my flashlight.ﬂ 
 
ﬁThank you,ﬂ Solomon said. ﬁWe won™t be long.ﬂ 

 
Flashlight?! Langdon™s heart was pounding wildly now.  
Peter took Langdon™s arm in his own and inched forward. ﬁWalk with me, Robert.ﬂ 
 
They moved slowly together ac
ross another threshold, and the security door rumbled shut 
behind them. 

 
Peter stopped short. ﬁIs something wrong?ﬂ 

 
Langdon was suddenly feeling queasy and off balance. ﬁI think I just need to take off this blindfold.ﬂ 
 
ﬁNot yet, we™re almost there.ﬂ 

 
ﬁAlmost 
where
?ﬂ Langdon felt a growing heaviness in the pit of his stomach. 
 
ﬁI told youŠI™m taking you to see the stair
case that descends to the Lost Word.ﬂ 
 
ﬁPeter, this isn™t funny!ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt™s not meant to be. It™s meant to open your mind, Robert. It™s meant to remind you that 
there are mysteries in this world that even 
you have yet to lay eyes upon. And before I take one more step with you, I want you 
to do something for me. I want you to 
believe . . . just for an instant . . . believe
 in the legend. Believe that you are about to peer down a winding staircase that plunges hundreds of feet to one of humankind™s greatest lost 
treasures.ﬂ 

 
Langdon felt dizzy. As much as he wanted to believe his dear friend, he could not. ﬁIs it much farther?ﬂ His velvet hoodwink was drenched in sweat. 

 
ﬁNo. Only a few more steps, actually. 
Through one last door. I™ll open it now.ﬂ  
Solomon let go of him for a moment, and as
 he did so, Langdon swayed, feeling light-headed. Unsteady, he reached out for stability, and Peter was quickly back at his side. The sound of a heavy automatic door rumbled in front of them. Peter took Langdon™s arm 

and they moved forward again. 

 
ﬁThis way.ﬂ 
 
They inched across another threshold, a
nd the door slid closed behind them.  
 
Silence. Cold.   Langdon immediately sensed that this place, wh
atever it was, had nothing to do with the 
world on the other side of the security doors. The air was dank and chilly, like a tomb. 
The acoustics felt dull and cramped. He felt an
 irrational bout of claustrophobia settling in. 
 
ﬁA few more steps.ﬂ Solomon guided him 
blindly around a corner and positioned him 

precisely. Finally, he said, ﬁTake off your blindfold.ﬂ  
Langdon seized the velvet hoodwink and tore 
it from his face. He looked all around to 
find out where he was, but he was still blind. He rubbed his eyes. Nothing. ﬁPeter, it™s pitch-black!ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, I know. Reach in front of
 you. There™s a railing. Grasp it.ﬂ  
Langdon groped in the darkness and found an iron railing.  
ﬁNow watch.ﬂ He could hear Peter fumbling with something, and suddenly a blazing 
flashlight beam pierced the darkness. It 
was pointed at the floor, and before Langdon could take in his surroundings, Solomon directed the flashlight out over the railing and pointed the beam straight down. 

 
Langdon was suddenly staring into a bottomless 
shaft . . . an endless winding staircase that plunged deep into the earth. My God! His knees nearly buckled, and he gripped the railing for support. The staircase was a traditional square spiral, and he could see at least thirty landings descending into the earth before the flashlight faded to nothing. I can™t even see the bottom!  
ﬁPeter . . .ﬂ he stammered. ﬁWhat 
is this place!ﬂ  
ﬁI™ll take you to the bottom of
 the staircase in a moment, but
 before I do, you need to see something else.ﬂ 

 
Too overwhelmed to protest, Langdon let Pete
r guide him away from the stairwell and 
across the strange little chamber. Peter kept 
the flashlight trained on the worn stone floor beneath their feet, and Langdon could get no re
al sense of the space around them . . . 
except that it was small. 

 A tiny stone chamber.  They arrived quickly at the room™s opposite 
wall, in which was embedded a rectangle of 
glass. Langdon thought it might be a window in
to a room beyond, and yet from where he 
stood, he saw only darkness on the other side. 
 
ﬁGo ahead,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁHave a look.ﬂ 
 ﬁWhat™s in there?ﬂ Langdon flashed for an in
stant on the Chamber of Reflection beneath 
the Capitol Building, and how he had believed, for a moment, that it might contain a 
portal to some giant underground cavern. 
 
ﬁJust look, Robert.ﬂ Solomon inched him fo
rward. ﬁAnd brace yourself
, because the sight will shock you.ﬂ  
Having no idea what to expect, Langdon moved towa
rd the glass. As he neared the portal, Peter turned out the flashlight, plunging the tiny chamber into total darkness. 
 
As his eyes adjusted, Langdon groped in front of him, his hands finding the wall, finding 
the glass, his face moving clos
er to the transparent portal. 
 
Still only darkness beyond. 
 
He leaned closer . . . pressing his face to the glass. 
 
Then he saw it. 
 
The wave of shock and disorientation that tore through Langdon™s body reached down inside and spun his internal compass upside 
down. He nearly fell backward as his mind 
strained to accept the utterly unanticipated sight that was before him. In his wildest 
dreams, Robert Langdon would never have guesse
d what lay on the other side of this glass. 
 
The vision was a glorious sight.  There in the darkness, a brilliant wh
ite light shone like a gleaming jewel. 
 
Langdon now understood it allŠthe barricade on the access road . . . the guards at the main entrance . . . the heavy metal door outside . . . the automatic doors that rumbled 

open and closed . . . the heaviness in his stomach . . . the lightness in his head . . . and now this tiny stone chamber. 
 
ﬁRobert,ﬂ Peter whispered behind him, ﬁsometim
es a change of perspective is all it takes to see the light.ﬂ 

 
Speechless, Langdon stared out through the win
dow. His gaze traveled into the darkness 
of the night, traversing more than a mile of
 empty space, dropping lower . . . lower . . . 
through the darkness . . . until it came to rest 
atop the brilliantly illuminated, stark white 
dome of the U.S. Capitol Building. 

 
Langdon had never seen the Capitol from this perspectiveŠ
hovering 555 feet in the air atop America™s great Egyptian obelisk. Tonight, 
for the first time in his life, he had 
ridden the elevator up to the tiny viewing chamber . . . at the pinnacle of the Washington 
Monument. 
  
 
 CHAPTER 129   
 
Robert Langdon stood mesmerized at the glass por
tal, absorbing the power of the 
landscape below him. Having ascended unknowingl
y hundreds of feet into the air, he was now admiring one of the most spect
acular vistas he had ever seen.  
The shining dome of the U.S. Capitol rose li
ke a mountain at the east end of the National Mall. On either side of the building, two parallel lines of light stretched toward him . . . 
the illuminated facades of the Smithsonian muse
ums . . . beacons of art, history, science, 
culture. 

 
Langdon now realized to his astonishment that much of what Peter 
had declared to be true . . . was in fact true. There is indeed a winding staircase . . . descending hundreds of feet beneath a massive stone. The huge capstone of this obelisk sat directly over his head, and Langdon now recalled a forgotten bit of trivia that seemed to have eerie relevance: 
the capstone of the Washington Monument 
weighed precisely thirty-three hundred pounds. 
 Again, the number 33.  More startling, however, was the knowledge that this capstone™s ultimate peak, the zenith 
of this obelisk, was crowned by a tiny, polished tip of aluminumŠa metal as precious as 

gold in its day. The shining apex of the Wa
shington Monument was onl
y about a foot tall, the same size as the Masonic Pyramid. Incredibly, this small metal pyramid bore a 

famous engravingŠ
Laus DeoŠ and Langdon suddenly understood. This is the true message of the base of the stone pyramid.   
 The seven symbols are a transliteration!
  The simplest of ciphers. 

 The symbols are letters.   The stonemason™s squareŠL  The element goldŠAU  The Greek SigmaŠS  The Greek DeltaŠD  Alchemical mercuryŠE  The OuroborosŠO  
 
ﬁLaus Deo,ﬂ Langdon whispered. The well-known Latin phraseŠmeaning ﬁpraise 
GodﬂŠwas inscribed on the tip of the Washi
ngton Monument in script letters only one 
inch tall. 
On full display . . . and yet invisible to all.  Laus Deo.  ﬁPraise God,ﬂ Peter said behind him, flipping 
on the soft lighting in the chamber. ﬁThe 
Masonic Pyramid™s final code.ﬂ 

 
Langdon turned. His friend was grinning broadly, and Langdon recalled that Peter had actually spoken
 the words ﬁpraise Godﬂ earlier inside the Masonic library. And I still missed it.  
Langdon felt a chill to realize how apt it was that the legendary Masonic Pyramid had 

guided him 
here . . . to America™s great obeliskŠthe symbol of ancient mystical 
wisdomŠrising toward the heaven
s at the heart 
of a nation.  
In a state of wonder, Langdon began moving counterclockwise around the perimeter of 
the tiny square room, arriving 
now at another viewing window.  North.  Through this northward-facing window, Langdon gazed down at the familiar silhouette of 

the White House directly in front of him. He
 raised his eyes to the horizon, where the 
straight line of Sixteenth Street ran due north toward the House of the Temple.  I am due south of Heredom.  He continued around the perimeter to th
e next window. Looking west, Langdon™s eyes traced the long rectangle of the reflecting pool to the Lincoln Memorial, its classical 
Greek architecture inspired by the Parthenon in Athens, Temple to AthenaŠgoddess of 
heroic undertakings. 
 
Annuit coeptis,
 Langdon thought. God favors our undertaking.  
Continuing to the final window, Langdon gazed s
outhward across the dark waters of the 
Tidal Basin, where the Jefferson Memorial shone brightly in the night. The gently sloping 
cupola, Langdon knew, was modeled after the 
Pantheon, the original home to the great 
Roman gods of mythology. 

 
Having looked in all four directions, Langdon now thought about the aerial photos he had seen of the National MallŠher four arms outstretched from the Washington Monument 
toward the cardinal points of the compass. I am standing at the crossroads of America.
  
Langdon continued back around to where Peter was standing. His mentor was beaming. 
ﬁWell, Robert, this is it. The Lost Word. 
This is where it™s buried. The Masonic Pyramid 
led us here.ﬂ 
 
Langdon did a double take. He had all but forgotten about the Lost Word. 

 
ﬁRobert, I know of nobody more 
trustworthy than you. And after a night like tonight, I believe you deserve to know what this is all about. As promis
ed in legend, the Lost Word is indeed buried at the bottom of a winding 
staircase.ﬂ He motioned to the mouth of the 
monument™s long stairwell. 

 
Langdon had finally started to get his feet back under him, but now he was puzzled. 
 
Peter quickly reached into his pocket and 
pulled out a small object. ﬁDo you remember 
this?ﬂ 

 
Langdon took the cube-shaped box that Peter had entrusted to him long ago. ﬁYes . . . but 
I™m afraid I didn™t do a very
 good job of protecting it.ﬂ  
Solomon chuckled. ﬁPerhaps the time had 
come for it to see the light of day.ﬂ 

 Langdon eyed the stone cube, wondering why Peter had just handed it to him. 
 ﬁWhat does this look like 
to you?ﬂ Peter asked. 
 Langdon eyed the 1514 and recalled his first impr
ession when Katherine had unwrapped the package. ﬁA cornerstone.ﬂ  
ﬁExactly,ﬂ Peter replied. ﬁNow, there are a few things you might not know about 

cornerstones. First, the 
concept of laying a cornerstone comes from the Old Testament.ﬂ 
 
Langdon nodded. ﬁThe Book of Psalms.ﬂ 

 
ﬁCorrect. And a true cornerstone is always buried beneath the groundŠsymbolizing the 
building™s initial step upward out of the earth toward the heavenly light.ﬂ  
Langdon glanced out at the Capitol, recalling that its cornerstone was buried so deep in 
the foundation that, to this day, excavations had been unable to find it.  
ﬁAnd finally,ﬂ Solomon said, 
ﬁlike the stone box in your hand, many cornerstones are 
little vaults . . . and have hollow cavities so that they can hold buried treasures . . . talismans, if you willŠsymbols of hope for 
the future of the building about to be 
erected.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was well aware of this tradition, too. Even today, Masons laid cornerstones in which they sealed meaningful objectsŠtime 
capsules, photos, proclamations, even the 
ashes of important people. 

 
ﬁMy purpose in telling you this,ﬂ Solomon said, glancing over at
 the stairwell, ﬁshould be clear.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYou think the Lost Word is buried in the 
cornerstone
 of the Washington Monument?ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t think
, Robert. I know. The Lost Word was buried in the cornerstone of this 
monument on July 4, 1848, in
 a full Masonic ritual.ﬂ  
Langdon stared at him. ﬁOur Masonic forefathers buried a 
word?!ﬂ  
Peter nodded. ﬁThey did indeed. They understood the true power of what they were 
burying.ﬂ 
 
All night, Langdon had been trying to wrap hi
s mind around sprawling, ethereal concepts 
. . . the Ancient Mysteries, the Lost Word, the Secrets of the Ages. He wanted something 
solid, and despite Peter™s claims that the key 
to it all was buried in a cornerstone 555 feet beneath him, Langdon was having a hard time accepting it. 
People study the mysteries for 
entire lifetimes and are still unable to access the power allegedly hidden there.
 Langdon flashed on Dürer™s Melencolia I
Šthe image of the dejected Adept, surrounded by the 
tools of his failed efforts to unveil the mystical secrets of alchemy. 
If the secrets can actually be unlocked, they will not be found in one place!
  Any answer, Langdon had always believed, was spread across the world in thousands of volumes . . . encoded into writings of Pyth
agoras, Hermes, Heraclitus, Paracelsus, and 
hundreds of others. The answer was found in dusty, forgotten tomes on alchemy, 
mysticism, magic, and philosophy. The answer
 was hidden in the ancient library of 
Alexandria, the clay tablets of Sumer, and the hieroglyphs of Egypt. 
 
ﬁPeter, I™m sorry,ﬂ Langdon said quietly, sh
aking his head. ﬁTo understand the Ancient 
Mysteries is a lifelong process. I can™t imagine how the key could possibly rest within a 
single word.ﬂ 
 
Peter placed a hand on Langdon™s shoulder. ﬁRober
t, the Lost Word is not a ‚word.™ﬂ He 
gave a sage smile. ﬁWe only call it the ‚Word™ 
because that™s what the ancients called it . . . in the beginning.ﬂ 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 130   
 In the beginning was the Word.  Dean Galloway knelt at the Great Crossing of the National Cathedral and prayed for 

America. He prayed that his beloved country 
would soon come to grasp the true power of the WordŠthe recorded collection of the wri
tten wisdom of all the ancient mastersŠthe 
spiritual truths taught by the great sages. 
 
History had blessed mankind with the wisest
 of teachers, profoundly enlightened souls 
whose understanding of the spiritual and ment
al mysteries exceeded all understanding. 
The precious words of these AdeptsŠBuddha, Jesus, Muhammad, Zoroaster, and countless othersŠhad been transmitted through hist
ory in the oldest and most precious of 
vessels. 
 
Books. 
 
Every culture on earth had its own sacred bookŠits own WordŠeach one different and yet each one the same. For Christians, the Word was the Bible, for Muslims the Koran, 

for Jews the Torah, for Hindus the Vedas, and on and on it went. 
 The Word shall light the way.
  For America™s Masonic forefathers, the Word had been the Bible. 
And yet few people in history have understood its true message.  Tonight, as Galloway knelt alone within the gr
eat cathedral, he placed his hands upon the 
WordŠa well-worn copy of his own Masonic Bible. This treasured book, like all Masonic Bibles, contained the Old Testament, 
the New Testament, and a treasure trove of 
Masonic philosophical writings. 

 
Although Galloway™s eyes could no longer read th
e text, he knew the preface by heart. Its 
glorious message had been read by millions 
of his brethren in countless languages around the world. 
 
The text read: 

 
TIME IS A RIVER . . . AND BOOKS ARE BOATS. MANY VOLUMES START 
DOWN THAT STREAM, ONLY TO BE 
WRECKED AND LOST BEYOND RECALL 
IN ITS SANDS. ONLY A FEW, A VERY 
FEW, ENDURE THE TESTINGS OF TIME 
AND LIVE TO BLESS THE AGES FOLLOWING.  

 
There is a reason these volumes survived, while others vanished. As a scholar of faith, Dean Galloway had always found it astonishing that the ancient spiritual textsŠthe most studied books on earthŠwere, in fact, the least understood.  Concealed within those pages, there hides a wondrous secret.  One day soon the light would dawn, and ma
nkind would finally begin to grasp the simple, transformative truth of the ancient teach
ings . . . and take a quantum leap forward 
in understanding his own magnificent nature. 

 
 
 
 CHAPTER 131   
 
The winding
 staircase that descends the spine of
 the Washington Monument consists of 
896 stone steps that spiral around an open elevator shaft. Langdon and Solomon were 
making their way down, Langdon still grappling 
with the startling fact that Peter had 
shared with him only moments ago: 
Robert, buried within the hollow cornerstone of this monument, our forefathers placed a single copy of the WordŠthe BibleŠwhich waits in darkness at the foot of this staircase.  
As they descended, Peter suddenly stopped on a landing and swung his flashlight beam to 
illuminate a large stone medallion embedded in the wall. 
 What in the world?! Langdon jumped when he saw the carving. 
 
The medallion depicted a frightening cloaked 
figure holding a scythe and kneeling beside an hourglass. The figure™s arm was raised, 
and his index finger was extended, pointing directly at a large open Bible, as if to say: ﬁThe answer is in there!ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared at the carving and then turned to Peter.  
His mentor™s eyes shone with mystery. ﬁI™d li
ke you to consider something, Robert.ﬂ His 
voice echoed down the empty stairwell. ﬁ
Why
 do you think the Bible has survived thousands of years of tumultuous history? Why 
is it still here? Is it 
because its stories are such compelling reading? Of course not . . . but there 
is a reason. There is a reason Christian monks spend lifetimes attempti
ng to decipher the Bible. There is a 
reason that 
Jewish mystics and Kabbalists pore over the Old Testament. And that 
reason
, Robert, is that there exist powerful secrets hidden in the pages of this ancient book . . . a vast collection of untapped wisdom waiting to be unveiled.ﬂ 

 
Langdon was no stranger to the theory that the Scriptures contained a hidden layer of meaning, a concealed message that was veiled
 in allegory, symbolism, and parable. 
 
ﬁThe prophets warn us,ﬂ Peter continued, ﬁthat the language used to share their secret mysteries is a cryptic one. The Gospel of Mark tells us, ‚Unto you is given to know the mystery . . . but it will be told in parable.™ Proverbs cautions that the sayings of the wise are ‚riddles,™ while Corinthians talks of ‚hidden wisdom.™ Th
e Gospel of John forewarns: ‚I will speak to you in parable . . . and use dark sayings.™ ﬂ  
Dark sayings,
 Langdon mused, knowing this strange phrase made numerous odd 
appearances in Proverbs as well as in Psalm 78. 
I will open my mouth in a parable and utter dark sayings of old. The concept of a ﬁdark saying,ﬂ Langdon had learned, did not mean that the saying was ﬁevilﬂ but rather 
that its true meaning was shadowed or 
obscured from the light. 
 
ﬁAnd if you have any doubts,ﬂ Peter added, ﬁCorinthians overtly tells us that the parables have two layers of meaning: ‚milk for babes and meat for men™Šwhere the 
milk is a watered-down reading for infantile minds, and the 
meat is the true message, accessible 
only to mature minds.ﬂ 

 
Peter raised the flashlight, again illumina
ting the carving of the cloaked figure pointing 
intently at the Bible. ﬁI know you are a skeptic, Robert, but consider this. If the Bible does not contain hidden meaning, then why have
 so many of history™s finest mindsŠ
including brilliant scientists at the Royal 
SocietyŠbecome so obse
ssed with studying it? 
Sir Isaac Newton wrote more than a million words attempting to decipher the true 
meaning of the Scripture, including a 1704 
manuscript that claimed he had extracted 
hidden scientific
 information from the Bible!ﬂ 
 Langdon knew this was true.  
ﬁAnd Sir Francis Bacon,ﬂ Peter continued, ﬁthe
 luminary hired by King James to literally 
create the authorized King James Bible, becam
e so utterly convinced that the Bible 
contained cryptic meaning that he wrote in his 
own codes, which are still studied today! Of course, as you know, Bacon was a Rosicrucian and penned The Wisdom of the 
Ancients.ﬂ Peter smiled. ﬁEven the iconoclastic poet William Blake hinted that we should 
read between the lines.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was familiar with the verse: 
BOTH READ THE BIBLE DAY AND NIGHT, 
 BUT THOU READ BLACK WH
ERE I READ WHITE.  
 
ﬁAnd it wasn™t just the European luminaries,ﬂ
 Peter continued, descending faster now. ﬁIt was here, Robert, at the very core of this young American nation, that our brightest 
forefathersŠJohn Adams, Ben Franklin, T
homas PaineŠall warned of the profound dangers of interpreting the Bible literally
. In fact, Thomas Jefferson was so convinced the 
Bible™s true message was 
hidden that he literally 
cut up the pages and reedited the book, attempting, in his words, ‚to do away with 
the artificial scaffolding and restore the genuine doctrines.™ ﬂ 
 
Langdon was well aware of this strange fact. The Jeffersonian Bible was still in print today and included many of his controversia
l revisions, among them the removal of the 
virgin birth and the resurrection. Incredibly, the Jeffersonian Bible had been presented to every incoming member of Congress during th
e first half of the nineteenth century.  
ﬁPeter, you know I find this topic fascinating, and I can understand that it might be 
tempting for bright minds to imagine the Scriptures contain hidden meaning, but it makes 
no logical sense to me. Any skill
ed professor will tell you that teaching is never done in code.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 

 
ﬁTeachers teach, Peter. We speak openly. Why would the prophetsŠt
he greatest teachers in historyŠobscure their language? If they hoped to 
change the world, why would they 
speak in code? Why not speak plainly so the world could understand?ﬂ 

 
Peter glanced back over his shoulder as he descended, looking surprised by the question. ﬁRobert, the Bible does not talk openly for the same reason the Ancient Mystery Schools 
were kept hidden . . . for the same reason the 
neophytes had to be initiated before learning the secret teachings of the ages . . . for the same reason the scientists in the Invisible 
College refused to share their knowledge with others. This information is 
powerful, Robert. The Ancient Mysteries cannot be shouted from the 
rooftops. The mysteries are a 
flaming torch, which, in the hands of a master
, can light the way, but which, in the hands 
of a madman, can scorch the earth.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stopped short. What is he saying? ﬁPeter, I™m talking about the 
Bible. Why are 
you talking about the Ancient Mysteries
?ﬂ  
Peter turned. ﬁRobert, don™t you see? The Ancient Mysteries and the Bible are the same thing.ﬂ 
 
Langdon stared in bewilderment. 

 
Peter was silent for several seconds, waiting for the concept to soak in. ﬁThe Bible is one 

of the books through which the mysteries ha
ve been passed down through history. Its pages are desperately trying to tell us the secret. Don™t you understand? The ‚dark sayings™ in the Bible are the whispers of the ancients, quietly sharing with us all of their secret wisdom.ﬂ 
 
Langdon said nothing. The Ancient Mysteries, 
as he understood them, were a kind of 
instruction manual for harnessing the latent 
power of the human mind . . . a recipe for 
personal apotheosis. He had never been able to accept the power of the mysteries, and 
certainly the notion that the Bible was some
how hiding a key to these mysteries was an 
impossible stretch. 

 
ﬁPeter, the Bible and the Ancient Mysteries are total 
opposites. The mysteries are all 
about the god within you . . . man as god. The Bible is all about the God 
above you . . . and man as a powerless sinner.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes! Exactly! You™ve put your finger on the precise problem! The moment mankind 
separated himself from God, the true meaning of
 the Word was lost. The voices of the 
ancient masters have now been drowned out, lo
st in the chaotic din of self-proclaimed 
practitioners shouting that they alone understand the Word . 
. . that the Word is written in their language and none other.ﬂ  
Peter continued down the stairs. 
 
ﬁRobert, you and I both know that the ancients would be horri
fied if they saw how their teachings have been perverted . . . how relig
ion has established itself as a tollbooth to 
heaven . . . how warriors march into battle be
lieving God favors their cause. We™ve lost 
the Word, and yet its true meaning is still with
in reach, right before our eyes. It exists in 
all the enduring texts, from the Bible to the Bhagavad Gita to the Koran and beyond. All of these texts are revered upon the altars of Freemasonry because Masons understand what the world seems to have forgotten . . . th
at each of these texts, in its own way, is quietly whispering the exact same message.ﬂ Peter™s voice welled with emotion. ﬁ ‚Know 
ye not that ye are gods?™ﬂ 
 Langdon was struck by the way this famous anci
ent saying kept surfacing tonight. He had 
reflected on it while talking to Galloway and al
so at the Capitol Building while trying to 
explain The Apotheosis of Washington.  Peter lowered his voice to a whisper. ﬁThe Buddha said, ‚You are God yourself.™ Jesus taught that ‚the kingdom of G
od is within you™ and even promised us, ‚The works I do, you can do . . . and greater.™ Even the first antipopeŠHippolytus of RomeŠquoted the same message, first uttered by the gnostic teacher Monoimus: ‚Abandon the 
search for 
God . . . instead, take yourself as the starting place.™ ﬂ 

 
Langdon flashed on the House of the Temple, wh
ere the Masonic Tyler™s chair bore two words of guidance carved across its back: KNOW THYSELF. 
 
ﬁA wise man once told me,ﬂ Peter said, his 
voice faint now, ﬁthe only difference between you and God is that you have forgotten you are divine.ﬂ  
ﬁPeter, I hear youŠI do. And I™d love to believe we are gods, but I see no gods walking 
our earth. I see no superhumans.Y
ou can point to the alleged mir
acles of the Bible, or any other religious text, but they are nothing but old stories fabricated by man and then 
exaggerated over time.ﬂ 

 
ﬁPerhaps,ﬂ Peter said. ﬁOr perhaps we simp
ly need our science to catch up with the wisdom of the ancients.ﬂ He paused. ﬁFunny th
ing is . . . I believe Katherine™s research may be poised to do just that.ﬂ 

 
Langdon suddenly remembered that Katherine 
had dashed off from the House of the 
Temple earlier. ﬁHey, where did she go, anyway?ﬂ 

 
ﬁShe™ll be here shortly,ﬂ Peter said, grinning. ﬁShe went to confirm a wonderful bit of 
good fortune.ﬂ 
 
Outside, at the base of the monument, Pete
r Solomon felt invigorated as he inhaled the cold night air. He watched in amusemen
t as Langdon stared intently at the ground, scratching his head and looking around at the foot of the obelisk.  
ﬁProfessor,ﬂ Peter joked, ﬁthe cornerstone that contains the Bible is underground. You can™t actually access the book, but I assure you it™s there.ﬂ  
ﬁI believe you,ﬂ Langdon said, appearing lost in thought. ﬁIt™s just . . . I noticed 
something.ﬂ 

 
Langdon stepped back now and surveyed the giant plaza on which the Washington 
Monument stood. The circular concourse was made
 entirely of white stone . . . except for two decorative courses of dark stone, which formed two concentric circles around the 
monument. 

 ﬁA circle within a circle,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁI never realized the Washington Monument 
stands at the center of a circle within a circle.ﬂ 
 
Peter had to laugh. He misses nothing
. ﬁYes, the great circumpunct . . . the universal symbol for God . . . at the crossroads of Am
erica.ﬂ He gave a coy shrug. ﬁI™m sure it™s 
just a coincidence.ﬂ 
 
Langdon seemed far off, gazing skyward now, hi
s eyes ascending the illuminated spire, 
which shone stark white against the black winter sky.  
Peter sensed Langdon was beginning to see this creation for what it truly was . . . a silent reminder of ancient wisdom . . . an icon of en
lightened man at the heart of a great nation. 
Even though Peter could not see the tiny aluminum tip at th
e top, he knew it was there, man™s enlightened mind st
raining toward heaven.  
Laus Deo. 
 
ﬁPeter?ﬂ Langdon approached, looking like a man who™d endured some kind of mystical 
initiation. ﬁI almost forgot,ﬂ he said, reach
ing into his pocket and producing Peter™s gold 
Masonic ring. ﬁI™ve been wanting to return this to you all night.ﬂ  
ﬁThank you, Robert.ﬂ Peter held out his left hand and took the ring, admiring it. ﬁYou 
know, all the secrecy and mystery surrounding this ring a
nd the Masonic Pyramid . . . it 
had an enormous effect on my life. When I was a young man, the pyramid was given to 

me with the promise that it hid mystical
 secrets. Its mere existence made me 
believe there were great mysteries in the world. It piqued my
 curiosity, fueled my 
sense of wonder, and inspired me to open my mind to the Ancien
t Mysteries.ﬂ He smile
d quietly and slipped the ring into his pocket. ﬁI now realize that the Masonic Pyramid™
s true purpose was not to reveal the answers, but rather to inspire a fascination with them.ﬂ 

 
The two men stood in silence for a long wh
ile at the foot of the monument.  
 
When Langdon finally spoke, his tone was serious. ﬁI need to ask you a favor, Peter . . . 
as a friend.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOf course. Anything.ﬂ 
 
Langdon made his request . . . firmly. 

 
Solomon nodded, knowing he was right. ﬁI will.ﬂ 

 
ﬁRight away,ﬂ Langdon added, motioning to the waiting Escalade. 

 
ﬁOkay . . . but one caveat.ﬂ 
 
Langdon rolled his eyes, chuckling. ﬁSome
how you always get the last word.ﬂ 
 ﬁYes, and there 
is one final thing I want 
you and Katherine to see.ﬂ  
ﬁAt this hour?ﬂ Langdon checked his watch. 

 
Solomon smiled warmly at his old friend. ﬁIt is
 Washington™s most sp
ectacular treasure . . . and something very, 
very few people have ever seen.ﬂ  
 
 
 CHAPTER 132   
 
Katherine Solomon™s
 heart felt light as she hurried up the hill toward the base of the 
Washington Monument. She had endured great 
shock and tragedy tonight, and yet her thoughts were refocused now, if only tempor
arily, on the wonderful news Peter had shared with her earlier . . . news she had just confirmed with her very own eyes. 
 My research is safe. All of it.
  Her lab™s holographic data drives had been destroyed tonight, but earlier, at the House of 
the Temple, Peter had informed her that he ha
d been secretly keepi
ng backups of all her Noetic research in the SMSC executive offices. 
You know I™m utterly fascinated with your work, he had explained, and I wanted to follow your progress without disturbing you.  
ﬁKatherine?ﬂ a deep voice called out. 
 
She looked up. 
 
A lone figure stood in silhouette at th
e base of the illuminated monument.  
 
ﬁRobert!ﬂ She hurried over and hugged him.  

 
ﬁI heard the good news,ﬂ Langdon whispered. ﬁYou must be relieved.ﬂ  
 
Her voice cracked with emotion. ﬁIncredibly.ﬂ The research Peter had saved was a 
scientific tour de forceŠa massive collection of experiments that proved human thought 

was a real and measurable force in the worl
d. Katherine™s experiments demonstrated the 
effect
 of human thought on everything from ice crys
tals to random-event 
generators to the movement of subatomic particles. The results 
were conclusive and irrefutable, with the 
potential to transform skeptics into belie
vers and affect global consciousness on a massive scale. ﬁEverything 
is going to change, Robert. Everything.ﬂ  ﬁPeter certainly thinks so.ﬂ 

 
Katherine glanced around for her brother. 
 
ﬁHospital,ﬂ Langdon said. ﬁI insisted he go as a favor to me.ﬂ 
 
Katherine exhaled, relieved. ﬁThank you.ﬂ 
 
ﬁHe told me to wait for you here.ﬂ 

 
Katherine nodded, her gaze climbing the glowing white obelisk. ﬁHe said he was 

bringing you here. Something about ‚Laus Deo™? He didn™t elaborate.ﬂ 
 
Langdon gave a tired chuckle. ﬁI™m not sure 
I entirely understand it myself.ﬂ He glanced 
up at the top of the monument. ﬁYour brothe
r said quite a few things tonight that I 
couldn™t get my mind around.ﬂ 

 
ﬁLet me guess,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁAncient Myst
eries, science, and the Holy Scriptures?ﬂ 
 
ﬁBingo.ﬂ 
 
ﬁWelcome to 
my world.ﬂ She winked. ﬁPeter initiated me
 into this long ago. It fueled a lot of my research.ﬂ 

 
ﬁIntuitively, some of what he said made sense.ﬂ Langdon shook his head. ﬁBut 
intellectually . . .ﬂ  
Katherine smiled and put her arm around him. 
ﬁYou know, Robert, I may be able to help 
you with that.ﬂ 
 
Deep inside the Capitol Building, Architect Warren Bellamy was walking down a 
deserted hallway. 
 
Only one thing left to do tonight, he thought. 
 
When he arrived at his office, he retrieved a very old key from his desk drawer. The key 

was black iron, long and slender, with faded ma
rkings. He slid it into his pocket and then prepared himself to welcome his guests. 

 
Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon were on their way to the Capitol. At Peter™s request, Bellamy was to provide them with 
a very rare opportunityŠthe chance to lay eyes upon this building™s most 
magnificent secret . . . someth
ing that could be revealed only by the Architect. 
 
   CHAPTER 133   
 
High above the floor of the Capitol Rotunda, 
Robert Langdon inched nervously around the circular catwalk that extended just be
neath the ceiling of the dome. He peered 
tentatively over the railing, dizzi
ed by the height, still unable 
to believe it had been less than ten hours since Peter™s hand had appeared in the middle of the floor below. 
 
On that same floor, the Architect of the 
Capitol was now a tiny speck some hundred and 
eighty feet below, moving steadily across 
the Rotunda and then disappearing. Bellamy 

had escorted Langdon and Katherine up to this balcony, leaving them here with very 
specific instructions. 
 Peter™s instructions.
  Langdon eyed the old iron key that Bellamy had 
handed to him. Then he glanced over at 
a cramped stairwell that ascended from 
this level . . . climbing higher still. 
God help me. These narrow stairs, according to the Architect, led up to a small metal door that could be 
unlocked with the iron key in Langdon™s hand. 
 
Beyond the door lay something that Peter insi
sted Langdon and Katherine see. Peter had not elaborated, but rather had left strict instructions regarding the precise 
hour at which the door was to be opened. We have to wait to open the door? Why?  
Langdon checked his watch again and groaned. 

 
Slipping the key into his pocket, he gazed ac
ross the gaping void before him at the far 
side of the balcony. Katherine had walked fearlessly ahead, apparently unfazed by the height. She was now halfway around the circumference, admiring every inch of 
Brumidi™s 
The Apotheosis of Washington,
 which loomed directly over their heads. From 
this rare vantage point, the fifteen-foot-tall figures that adorned the nearly five thousand square feet of the Capitol Dome we
re visible in astonishing detail.  
Langdon turned his back to Katherine, faced 
the outer wall, and whispered very quietly, ﬁKatherine, this is your conscience speaking. Why did you abandon Robert?ﬂ 
 
Katherine was apparently familiar with the dome™s startling acoustical properties . . . 

because the wall whispered back. ﬁBecause R
obert is being a chicken. He should come 
over here with me. We have plenty of tim
e before we™re allowed to open that door.ﬂ 
 
Langdon knew she was right and reluctantly made his way around the balcony, hugging 
the wall as he went.  ﬁThis ceiling is absolutely amazing,ﬂ Katherine marveled, her neck craned to take in the 

enormous splendor of the 
Apotheosis overhead. ﬁMythical gods all mixed in with 
scientific inventors and th
eir creations? And to think 
this is the image at the center of our 
Capitol.ﬂ 
 
Langdon turned his eyes upward to the sprawling forms of Franklin, Fulton, and Morse 
with their technological inventions. A shining rainbow arched away from these figures, guiding his eye to George Washingt
on ascending to heaven on a cloud. The great promise of man becoming God.  
Katherine said, ﬁIt™s as if th
e entire essence of the Ancien
t Mysteries is 
hovering over the Rotunda.ﬂ 
 
Langdon had to admit, not many frescoes in th
e world fused scientific inventions with mythical gods and human apotheosis. This cei
ling™s spectacular collection of images was 
indeed a message of the Ancient Mysteries, 
and it was here for a reason. The founding 
fathers had envisioned America as a blank canva
s, a fertile field on which the seeds of the mysteries could be sown. Today, this soaring iconŠthe father of our country ascending to heavenŠhung silently above our lawmaker
s, leaders, and presidents . . . a bold reminder, a map to the future, a promise of 
a time when man would evolve to complete 

spiritual maturity. 

 
ﬁRobert,ﬂ Katherine whispered, 
her gaze still fixated on the ma
ssive figures of America™s 
great inventors accompanied by Minerva. ﬁI
t™s prophetic, really. Today, man™s most 
advanced inventions are being used to study man™s most ancient ideas. The science of 
Noetics may be new, but it™s actually the 
oldest science on earthŠthe study of human 
thought.ﬂ She turned to him now, her eyes f
illed with wonder. ﬁAnd we™re learning that the ancients actually understood thought more profoundly than we do today.ﬂ 
 
ﬁMakes sense,ﬂ Langdon replied. ﬁThe human mind was the only technology the ancients 

had at their disposal. The early philosophers studied it relentlessly.ﬂ  
ﬁYes! The ancient texts are obsessed with the power of the human mind. The Vedas 
describe the flow of mind energy. The 
Pistis Sophia describes universal consciousness. The Zohar explores the nature of mind spirit. 
The Shamanic texts predict Einstein™s 
‚remote influence™ in terms of healing at a di
stance. It™s all there! And don™t even get me 
started about the Bible.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYou, too?ﬂ Langdon said, chuckling. ﬁYour brother tried to convince me that the Bible 
is encoded with scientific information.ﬂ 

 
ﬁIt certainly is,ﬂ she said. ﬁAnd if you don™t believe Peter, read some of Newton™s 
esoteric texts on the Bible. When you start to 
understand the cryptic parables in the Bible, Robert, you realize it™s a study of the human mind.ﬂ 
 Langdon shrugged. ﬁI guess I™d better go back and read it again.ﬂ  
ﬁLet me ask you something,ﬂ she said, clearl
y not appreciating his skepticism. ﬁWhen the 
Bible tells us to ‚go build our temple™ . . . a 
temple that we must ‚build with no tools and 
making no noise,™ what 
temple do you think it™s talking about?ﬂ 
 
ﬁWell, the text does say your body is a temple.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes, Corinthians 3:16. You are the temple of God.ﬂ She smiled at him. ﬁAnd the Gospel 
of John says the exact same thing. Robert, 
the Scriptures are well aware of the power latent within us, and they are urging us to harness that power . . . urging us to build the temples of our 
minds.ﬂ  
ﬁUnfortunately, I think much of the religious world is waiting for a real temple to be 
rebuilt. It™s part of the Messianic Prophecy.ﬂ 

 
ﬁYes, but that overlooks an important poi
nt. The Second Coming is the coming of 
manŠthe moment when mankind finally 
builds the temple of his mind.ﬂ 
 
ﬁI don™t know,ﬂ Langdon said, rubbing his chin. ﬁI™m no Bible scholar, but I™m pretty 
sure the Scriptures describe in detail a physical temple that needs to be built. The structure is described as being in two partsŠan outer temple
 called the Holy Place and an 
inner sanctuary called the Holy of Holies. 
The two parts are separated from each other by 
a thin veil.ﬂ 

 
Katherine grinned. ﬁPretty good recall for a Bible skeptic. By the way, have you ever seen an actual human brain? It™s built in 
two partsŠan outer part called the dura mater 
and an inner part called the pia mater. Th
ese two parts are separated by the arachnoidŠa veil of weblike tissue.ﬂ 
 
Langdon cocked his head in surprise. 
 
Gently, she reached up and touched Langdon™s temple. ﬁThere™s a reason they call this 
your temple, Robert.ﬂ  
As Langdon tried to process what Katherine 
had said, he flashed unexpectedly on the gnostic Gospel of Mary: Where the mind is, there is the treasure.
  
ﬁPerhaps you™ve heard,ﬂ Katherine said, softly now, ﬁabout the brain scans taken of yogis while they meditate? The human brain, 
in advanced states of focus, will 
physically create a waxlike substance from the pineal gland. This brain secretion is unlike anything else in the body. It has an incredible healing effect, can literally regenerate cells, and may be one 
of the reasons yogis live so long. This is real science, Robert. This substance has inconceivable properties and can be created only by a mind that is highly tuned to a 
deeply focused state.ﬂ 

 ﬁI remember reading about that a few years back.ﬂ 
 
ﬁYes, and on that topic, you™re familiar wi
th the Bible™s account of ‚manna from 
heaven™?ﬂ 
 
Langdon saw no connection. ﬁYou mean the magical
 substance that fell from heaven to 
nourish the hungry?ﬂ 

 
ﬁExactly. The substance was said to heal the sick, provide everlasting life, and, strangely, cause no waste in those who consumed it.ﬂ Ka
therine paused, as if waiting for him to 
understand. ﬁRobert?ﬂ she prodded. ﬁA ki
nd of nourishment that fell from 
heaven?ﬂ She 
tapped her temple. ﬁMagically heals the body
? Creates no waste? Don™t you see? These 
are code words, Robert! Temple is code for ‚body.™ Heaven is code for ‚mind.™ 
Jacob™s ladder is your spine. And manna is this rare brain secretion. When you see these code words in Scripture, pay attention. They are often markers for a more profound meaning 
concealed beneath the surface.ﬂ 

 
Katherine™s words were coming out in rapi
d-fire succession now, explaining how this 

same magical substance appeared 
throughout the Ancient Mysteries:
 Nectar of the Gods, Elixir of Life, Fountain of Youth, Philosopher™s Stone, ambrosia, dew, 
ojas, soma. Then 
she launched into an explanation about the brain™s pineal gland representing the all-
seeing eye of God. ﬁAccording to Matthew 6:22,
ﬂ she said excitedly, ﬁ ‚when your eye is 
single, your body fills with light.™ This concept 
is also represented by the Ajna chakra 
and the dot on a Hindu™s forehead, whichŠﬂ 
 
Katherine stopped short, looking sheepish. ﬁSorry . . . I know I™m rambling. I just find 
this all so exhilarating. For years I™ve studied the ancients™ claims of man™s awesome 
mental power, and now 
science is showing us that accessing
 that power is an actual physical process. Our brains, if used correctly, can call forth powers that are quite literally superhuman. The Bible,
 like many ancient texts, is 
a detailed exposition of the most sophisticated machine ever created . . . 
the human mind.ﬂ She sighed. ﬁIncredibly, science has yet to scratch the surf
ace of the mind™s full promise.ﬂ 
 
ﬁIt sounds like your work in Noetics will be a quantum leap forward.ﬂ 
 
ﬁOr backward,ﬂ she said. ﬁThe ancients already knew
 many of the scientific truths we™re 
now rediscovering. Within a matter of years, modern man will be forced to accept what is 

now unthinkable: our minds can generate energy capable of 
transforming physical matter.ﬂ She paused. ﬁParticles 
react to our thoughts . . . which means our 
thoughts have the power to change the world.ﬂ 
 
Langdon smiled softly. 
 
ﬁWhat my research has brought me to believe is 
this,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁGod is very realŠa mental energy that pe
rvades everything. And we, as human beings, have been 
created in that
 imageŠﬂ 
 ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ Langdon interrupted. ﬁCreated in
 the image of . . . mental energy?ﬂ 
 
ﬁExactly. Our physical bodies have e
volved over the ages, but it was our minds that were created in the image of
 God. We™ve been read
ing the Bible too literally. We learn that God created us in his image, but it™s not our 
physical bodies that resemble God, it™s our 
minds.ﬂ  
Langdon was silent now, fully engrossed. 
 
ﬁThis is the great gift, Robert, and God is waiting for us
 to understand it. All around the world, we are gazing skyward, waiting for 
God . . . never realizing that God is waiting for us.ﬂ Katherine paused, letting her words soak in. ﬁWe are 
creators, and yet we naively play the role of ‚the created
.™ We see ourselves as helpless sheep buffeted around by the 
God who made us. We kneel like frightened 
children, begging for help, for forgiveness, for good luck. But once we realize that we are truly created in the Creator™s image, we 
will start to understand that we, too, must be Creators. When 
we understand this fact, the doors will burst wide open for human potential.ﬂ 

 
Langdon recalled a passage that had always stuck with him from the work of the 
philosopher Manly P. Hall: If the infinite had not desired man to be wise, he would not have bestowed upon him the faculty of knowing.
 Langdon gazed up again at the image of 
The Apotheosis of WashingtonŠthe symbolic ascent of man to deity. 
The created . . . becoming the Creator.
  
ﬁThe most amazing part,ﬂ Katherine said, ﬁis th
at as soon as we humans begin to harness 
our true power, we will have enormous control over our world. We will be able to 
design reality rather than merely react to it.ﬂ 

 
Langdon lowered his gaze. ﬁThat sounds . . . dangerous.ﬂ 
 
Katherine looked startled . . . and impressed. ﬁYes, exactly! If thoughts affect the world, 
then we must be very careful 
how we think. Destructive thought
s have influence, too, and we all know it™s far easier to destroy than it is to create.ﬂ  
Langdon thought of all the lore about needing to protect the ancient wisdom from the 
unworthy and share it only with the enlightened. He thought of the Invisible College, and 
the great scientist Isaac Newton™s request to Ro
bert Boyle to keep ﬁhigh silenceﬂ about 
their secret research. It cannot be communicated, Newton wrote in 1676, without immense damage to the world.  
ﬁThere™s an interesting twist here,ﬂ Katherine said. ﬁThe great irony is that all the religions of the world, for centuries, have been urging their followers to embrace the 

concepts of faith and belief. Now science, which for centuries has derided religion as superstition, must admit that
 its next big frontier is quite literally the science of 
faith and belief
 . . . the power of focused conviction and intention. The same science that eroded 
our faith in the miraculous is now building 
a bridge back across the chasm it created.ﬂ 
 
Langdon considered her words for a long time. Sl
owly he raised his eyes again to the Apotheosis. ﬁI have a question,ﬂ he said, looking back at Katherine. ﬁEven if I could accept, just for an instant, that I have the 
power to change physical matter with my mind, 
and literally manifest all that 
I desire . . . I™m afraid I see nothing in my life to make me 
believe I have such power.ﬂ 
 
She shrugged. ﬁThen you™re not looking hard enough.ﬂ  
 
ﬁCome on, I want a real answer. That™s the answer of a 
priest. I want the answer of a scientist
.ﬂ  
ﬁYou want a real answer? Here it is. If
 I hand you a violin and say you have the capability to use it to make incred
ible music, I am not lying. You 
do have the capability, but you™ll need enormous amounts of practice to
 manifest it. This is no different from 
learning to use your mind, Robert
. Well-directed thought is a learned skill. To manifest 
an intention requires laserlike focus, full sensory visualization, and a profound belief. We have proven this in a lab. And just like playing a violin, there are people who exhibit greater natural ability than others. Look to history. Look to the stories of those enlightened minds who performed miraculous feats.ﬂ 

 
ﬁKatherine, please don™t tell me you actually 
believe in the miracles. I mean, seriously . . . 
turning water into wine, healing th
e sick with the touch of a hand?ﬂ  
Katherine took a long breath and blew it out slowly. ﬁI have witnessed people transform 
cancer cells into healthy cells simply by 
thinking
 about them. I have witnessed human 
minds affecting the physical world in my
riad ways. And once you see that happen, Robert, once this becomes part of your reality, 
then some of the miracles you read about 
become simply a matter of degree.ﬂ 
 
Langdon was pensive. ﬁIt™s an inspiring way to see the world, Katherine, but for me, it 

just feels like an impossible 
leap of faith. And as you know, faith has never come easily 
for me.ﬂ 

 
ﬁThen don™t think of it as faith. Think of it simply as changing your perspective, 
accepting that the world is not precisely as
 you imagine. Historically, every major 
scientific breakthrough began with a simple idea that threat
ened to overturn all of our beliefs. The simple statement ‚the earth is
 round™ was mocked as
 utterly impossible because most people believed the oceans woul
d flow off the planet. Heliocentricity was called heresy. Small minds have always lash
ed out at what they don™t understand. There are those who create . . . and those who tear
 down. That dynamic has existed for all time. 
But eventually the creators find believers, a
nd the number of believe
rs reaches a critical 
mass, and suddenly the world becomes round, or
 the solar system becomes heliocentric. 
Perception is transformed, a
nd a new reality is born.ﬂ 
 Langdon nodded, his thoughts drifting now.  
ﬁYou have a funny look on your face,ﬂ she said. 
 
ﬁOh, I don™t know. For some reason 
I was just remembering how I used to canoe out into 
the middle of the lake late at night, lie 
down under the stars, and think about stuff like this.ﬂ 
 
She nodded knowingly. ﬁI think we all have a similar memory. Something about lying on 
our backs staring up at the heavens . . . opens the mind.ﬂ She glanced up at the ceiling 
and then said, ﬁGive me your jacket.ﬂ 

 
ﬁWhat?ﬂ He took it off and gave it to her. 

 
She folded it twice and laid it down on th
e catwalk like a long pillow. ﬁLie down.ﬂ 
 
Langdon lay on his back, and Katherine positioned his head on half of the folded jacket. 
Then she lay down beside himŠtwo kids, s
houlder to shoulder on the narrow catwalk, staring up at Brumidi™s enormous fresco. 

 
ﬁOkay,ﬂ she whispered. ﬁPut yourself in that same mind-set . . . a kid lying out in a canoe 
. . . looking up at the stars . . . his mind open and full of wonder.ﬂ 
 
Langdon tried to obey, although at the moment, pr
one and comfortable, he was feeling a sudden wave of exhaustion. As his vision blurred, he perceived a muted shape overhead 

that immediately woke him. 
Is that possible? He could not believe he hadn™t noticed it before, but the figures in The Apotheosis of Washington were clearly arranged in two 
concentric ringsŠa circle within a circle. The Apotheosis is also a circumpunct? Langdon wondered what else he had missed tonight. 

 
ﬁThere™s something important I want to tell 
you, Robert. There™s anothe
r piece to all this . . . a piece that I believe is the single mo
st astonishing aspect of my research.ﬂ 
 There™s more?
  Katherine propped herself on her elbow. ﬁAnd I promise . . . if we as humans can 
honestly grasp this one simple truth . . . the world will change overnight.ﬂ 
 
She now had his full attention. 
 
ﬁI should preface this,ﬂ she said, ﬁby remi
nding you of the Masonic mantras to ‚gather 

what is scattered™ . . . to bring ‚order from chaos™ 
. . . to find ‚at-one-ment.™ ﬂ 
 
ﬁGo on.ﬂ Langdon was intrigued. 
 
Katherine smiled down at him. ﬁWe have scie
ntifically proven that
 the power of human 
thought grows exponentially with the number of minds 
that share that thought.ﬂ  Langdon remained silent, wondering wh
ere she was going with this idea.  
ﬁWhat I™m saying is this . . . two heads are be
tter than one . . . and yet two heads are not 
twice better, they are many, 
many times better. Multiple minds working in unison 
magnify a thought™s effect . . . 
exponentially
. This is the inherent power of prayer groups, healing circles, singing in unison, and worshipping en masse. The idea of 
universal consciousness is no ethereal New Age concept. It™s a hard-core scientific
 reality . . . and harnessing it has the potential to transform our
 world. This is the underlying discovery of Noetic Science. What™s more, it™s happeni
ng right now. You can feel it all around you. Technology is linking us in ways we neve
r imagined possible: Twitter, Google, 
Wikipedia, and othersŠall blend to create 
a web of interconnected minds.ﬂ She laughed. 
ﬁAnd I guarantee you, as soon as I publish my work, the Twitterati 
will all be sending 
tweets that say, ‚
learning about Noetics,™ and interest in this science will explode 
exponentially.ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s eyelids felt impossibly heavy. ﬁYou know, I still haven™t learned how to send a twitter.ﬂ 
 
ﬁA tweet,ﬂ she corrected, laughing. 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ 

 
ﬁNever mind. Close your eyes. I™ll wake you when it™s time.ﬂ 

 Langdon realized he had all but forgotten the old key the Architect had given them . . . 
and why they had come up here. As a new wave of exhaustion engulfed him, Langdon 
shut his eyes. In the darkness of his mind, he fou
nd himself thinking about 
universal consciousness . . . about Plato™s writings on ﬁthe mind of the worl
dﬂ and ﬁgathering Godﬂ . . . Jung™s ﬁcollective unconscious.ﬂ The notion was as simple as it was startling. 

 God is found in the collection of Many . . . rather than in the One.  ﬁElohim,ﬂ Langdon said suddenly, his eyes flyi
ng open again as he made an unexpected 
connection. 
 
ﬁI™m sorry?ﬂ Katherine was 
still gazing down at him. 
 
ﬁElohim,ﬂ he repeated. ﬁThe Hebrew word 
for God in the Old Testament! I™ve always 
wondered about it.ﬂ 
 
Katherine gave a knowing smile. ﬁYes. The word is 
plural.ﬂ  
Exactly!
 Langdon had never understood why the very first passages of the Bible referred to God as a plural being. Elohim. The Almighty God in Genesis was described not as 
One . . . but as Many.   
ﬁGod is plural,ﬂ Katherine whispered, ﬁbecause the minds of man are plural.ﬂ 
 
Langdon™s thoughts were spiraling now . . . dreams, memories, hopes, fears, revelations . 
. . all swirling above him in the Rotunda dome. As his eyes began to close again, he found himself staring at three word
s in Latin, painted within the Apotheosis.  
E PLURIBUS UNUM. 

 
ﬁOut of many, one,ﬂ he thought, slipping off into sleep.  
 
 
 Epilogue  
 
Robert Langdon awoke slowly. 
 
Faces gazed down at him. Where am I?  
A moment later, he recalled where he
 was. He sat up slowly beneath the Apotheosis. His back felt stiff from lying on the hard catwalk. 

 Where™s Katherine?  Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. It™s almost time. He pulled himself to his 
feet, peering cautiously over the bani
ster into the gaping space below. 
 
ﬁKatherine?ﬂ he called out. 

 
The word echoed back in the silence of the deserted Rotunda.  
Retrieving his tweed jacket from the floor, he brushed it off and put it back on. He 
checked his pockets. The iron key the Architect had given him was gone.  
Making his way back around the walkway, Langdon headed for the opening the Architect 

had shown them . . . steep metal stairs as
cending into cramped darkness. He began to 
climb. Higher and higher he ascended. Gradua
lly the stairway became more narrow and 
more inclined. Still Langdon pushed on. 
 Just a little farther.  The steps had become almost ladderlike now
, the passage frighteningly constricted. Finally, the stairs ended, and Langdon stepped up onto a small landing. Before him was a 
heavy metal door. The iron key was in the 
lock, and the door hung slightly ajar. He pushed, and the door creaked open. The air beyond felt cold. As Langdon stepped across the threshold into murky darkness, he realized he was now outside. 
 
ﬁI was just coming to get you,ﬂ Katherine 
said, smiling at him. ﬁIt™s almost time.ﬂ 
 
When Langdon recognized his surroundings, he drew a startled breath. He was standing on a tiny skywalk that encircled the pinnacle of the U.S. Capitol Dome. Directly above 
him, the bronze Statue of Freedom gazed out over the sleeping capital city. She faced the 

east, where the first crimson splashes 
of dawn had begun to paint the horizon. 
 
Katherine guided Langdon around the balcony until they were facing west, perfectly 

aligned with the National Mall. In the di
stance, the silhouette of the Washington 
Monument stood in the early-morning light. 
From this vantage point, the towering obelisk looked even more impressive than it had before. 

 
ﬁWhen it was built,ﬂ Katherine whispered, ﬁit was the tallest structure on the entire 

planet.ﬂ 

 
Langdon pictured the old sepia photographs of stonemasons 
on scaffolding, more than 
five hundred feet in the air, laying each block by hand, one by one.  
We are builders, he thought. We are creators.
  Since the beginning of time, man had sensed 
there was something special about himself . 
. . something more. He had longed for power
s he did not possess. He had dreamed of 
flying, of healing, and of transforming his world in every way imaginable. 
 
And he had done just that. 
 
Today, the shrines to man™s accomplishments adorned the National Mall. The 

Smithsonian museums burgeoned with our invent
ions, our art, our science, and the ideas 
of our great thinkers. They told the history of man as creatorŠfrom the stone tools in the 
Native American History Museum to the jets
 and rockets in the National Air and Space 
Museum. 

 If our ancestors could see us today, surely they would think us gods.
  As Langdon peered through the predawn mist at
 the sprawling geomet
ry of museums and 
monuments before him, his eyes re
turned to the Washington Monument
. He pictured the 
lone Bible in the buried cornerstone and thought of how the Word of God was really the word of man.  
He thought about the great circumpunct, and 
how it had been embedded in the circular 
plaza beneath the monument at the crossroads of America. Langdon thought suddenly of 
the little stone box Peter had entrusted to him. The cube, he now realized, had unhinged 
and opened to form the same exact geometrical formŠa cross with a circumpunct at its 

center. Langdon had to laugh. Even that little box was hinting at this crossroads.  
ﬁRobert, look!ﬂ Katherine pointed to the top of the monument. 
 
Langdon lifted his gaze but saw nothing. 
 
Then, staring more intently, he glimpsed it. 

 
Across the Mall, a tiny speck of golden sunlight was glinting off the highest tip of the towering obelisk. The shining pinpoint grew quickly brighter, more radiant, gleaming on 
the capstone™s aluminum peak. Langdon watched 
in wonder as the light transformed into 
a beacon that hovered above the shadowed city. He pictured the tiny engraving on the east-facing side of the aluminum tip and rea
lized to his amazement that the first ray of 
sunlight to hit the nation™s capital, every 
single day, did so by illuminating two words: 
 Laus Deo.  ﬁRobert,ﬂ Katherine whispered. ﬁNobody ever gets
 to come up here at sunrise. This is 
what Peter wanted us to witness.ﬂ 
 
Langdon could feel his pulse quickening as the glow atop the monument intensified. 
 
ﬁHe said he believes this is why the forefa
thers built the monument so tall. I don™t know 
if that™s true, but I do know thisŠthere™s a very old law decreeing that nothing taller can 
be built in our capital city. Ever.ﬂ  
The light inched farther down the capstone as the sun crept over th
e horizon behind them. As Langdon watched, he could almost sense, a
ll around him, the celestial spheres tracing 

their eternal orbits through 
the void of space. He thought of the Great Architect of the 
Universe and how Peter had said specifically that the treasure he wanted to show Langdon could be unveiled only by the Architect. Langdon had assumed this meant 
Warren Bellamy. 
Wrong Architect.  
As the rays of sunlight strengthened, the golden glow engulfed the entirety of the thirty-three-hundred-pound capstone. The mind of man . . . receiving enlightenment.
 The light 
then began inching down the monument, co
mmencing the same descent it performed 
every morning. 
Heaven moving toward earth . . . God connecting to man. This process, Langdon realized, would reverse come evening. The sun would dip in the west, and the 
light would climb again from earth back 
to heaven . . . preparing for a new day.  
Beside him, Katherine shivered and inch
ed closer. Langdon put his arm around her. As 
the two of them stood side by side in sile
nce, Langdon thought about all he had learned tonight. He thought of Katherine™s belief that everything was about to change. He thought of Peter™s faith that an age of enlightenment
 was imminent. And he thought of the words 
of a great prophet who had boldly declared: 
Nothing is hidden that will not be made 
known; nothing is secret that
 will not come to light.
 
 
As the sun rose over Washington, Langdon looked 
to the heavens, wher
e the last of the 
nighttime stars were fading out. He thought 
about science, about faith, about man. He 
thought about how every culture, in every coun
try, in every time, had always shared one 
thing. We all had the Creator. We used diffe
rent names, different faces, and different 
prayers, but God was the universal constant 
for man. God was the symbol we all shared . 
. . the symbol of all the myst
eries of life that we could not
 understand. The ancients had 
praised God as a symbol of our limitless human
 potential, but that ancient symbol had 
been lost over time. Until now. 
 
In that moment, standing atop the Capitol, wi
th the warmth of the sun streaming down all 
around him, Robert Langdon felt a powerful upwelling deep within himself. It was an 
emotion he had never felt this 
profoundly in his entire life. 
 
Hope.
 
 
 
 
ALSO BY DAN BROWN
 
Featuring Robert Langdon 
THE DA VINCI CODE 
 
ANGELS & DEMONS
 
 
DECEPTION POINT 
 
DIGITAL FORTRESS
 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
 
 
 
Dan Brown
 is the author of 
The Da Vinci Code,
 one of the most widely read novels of all 
time, as well as the international bestsellers 
Angels & Demons, Deception Point,
 and 
Digital Fortress.
 He lives in New England with his wife.  
